A Comparative Study of Environmental Cognition in a Real Environment and
its VRML Simulation (Virtual Reality Modelling Language)
Ayman H. Mahmoud, Andrew Clayden, and Catherine Higgins
Department of Landscape, University of Sheffield
Abstract
This paper investigates the acquisition of environmental
cognitive knowledge in a real world and its desktop
VRML simulation. It focuses on the effect of design
background and gender on spatial cognition in both
displays. A post-test-only control-group design is used
examine to what extent a desktop VRML simulation
providse users with cognitive data that is comparable to
real-world experience. Results indicate that there is a
between-group agreement and disagreement depending
on the typology of space. Participants using desktop
VRML could provide cognitive distance estimations that
are equivalent to their counterparts in real world. Design
background did have a significant effect on spatial
cognition in real world, however it did not show a
remarkable effect in desktop VRML . Gender has effected
heights’ estimation in real world, however it did not show
any effect in desktop VRML.

Introduction
The study that is reported in this paper considers evidence
for the degree to which VRML (Virtual Reality
Modelling Language) simulations provoke similar
environmental cognitive responses to those experienced
in the real environment. It describes an investigation of
the validity of VRML simulations through analysis of
independent preference reactions for a real landscape and
its equivalent VRML representation.

extent to which the environment is understood to be
structured and harmonious. Legibility refers to the extent
to which users can locate and orientate them within an
environment. Engagement is defined by the Kaplans as
the extent to which people are interested in a setting.
Engagement is determined by ‘complexity’ and ‘mystery’
as predictors. Complexity is defined as the amount of
diversity within a setting. Mystery refers to the extent to
which an environment is experienced as offering
opportunities for further exploration. Coherence and
legibility
accommodate
understanding,
whereas
complexity and mystery engage users by introducing
uncertainty and challenge to make a place interesting.
The study reported in this paper uses Kaplan & Kaplan’s
cognitive model to carry out a comparative study of
cognitive experience of a digital and actual environment.
Kaplan & Kaplan [17] suggest that environmental
behaviour can be studied in both real and simulated
settings.
In addition to using the Kaplan’s cognitive
model, this study also adapted Golledge & Stimson’s [12]
method for establishing cognitive ability to gauge
distance. Cognitive distance describes “ the relative
spatial separation of objects in a cognitive map”. [12:75].
There are indications that differences in people’s ability
to accurately judge distance are based on a number of
factors. These factors include gender [20], the nature of
the endpoints between which cognitive distances are
estimated [24], and the nature and frequency of
intervening barriers [21].

Investigating Environmental Cognition

Environmental cognition in real and simulated
landscapes

Environmental cognition can be defined as cognitive
activity which enables the ‘acquisition and representation
of predominantly spatial information in real-world
settings’ [9,10,11,22]. Many environmental cognition
studies have been conducted in outdoors-physical settings
[9,19,26], however, these field-based studies have
encountered empirical and analytical problems including
the difficulty in maintaining enough control.
Kaplan & Kaplan [17,18] provided a cognitive model to
study cognitive-based landscape preferences that rests on
two main motivational properties including a need to
understand one’s surroundings and a need to engage with
that environment. Understanding is determined by
‘coherence’ and ‘legibility’. Coherence refers to the

The validity of media used to simulate landscapes has
been subject to a considerable number of investigations
[1, 25]. Craik’s [7] research indicated that there was a
need to study the effects of different simulation media
upon viewer’s understanding of the environment which
was being represented in the simulation. More recently
Evans & Garling [10] argued that real-world settings
differ from the stimuli used in most psychological
investigations because real-world settings exhibit many
extraneous factors on behavioural responses including
variables such as weather conditions, and human
activities taking place. Earlier Ittelson [15] indicated that
real-world stimuli occur in a spatial and temporal context;
that surrounds and engages people who interact with

places in a dynamic way. These studies suggest the need
for simulated environments that are capable of replicating
some of the interactive, temporal and dynamic qualities of
real-world settings. Recent studies have begun to provide
evidence that virtual digital environments (VE) have the
potential to replicate some of these “real world” qualities.
Virtual environments as simulated settings
Henry [14] sought to compare the performance of
participants who navigated a real building and that of
participants who navigated a low visual fidelity virtual
model of the same building displayed using either a
desktop VE or immersive VE. He found no significant
differences between the three groups in terms of
participants’ directional accuracy when pointing to
unseen locations.
Other studies suggested that spatial knowledge is
developed more quickly in the real world than in VE and
furthermore that spatial knowledge developed in a VE is
less accurate than that developed in the real world. [23,
30, 31]
Cognitive distance in virtual environments has
received some attention in recent literature. Turner &
Turner [27] studied distance estimation in minimal virtual
environments. They concluded that such virtual
environments
favour
a
“restricted
Euclidean
environment”. Other researchers have studied the
practical applications of VE technology for environmental
planning and design. Hall [13] investigated the role of
computer visualisation in planning control.
Vazquez, and Martin’s, [28] comparative study
of computer models and architectural scale models found
that computer models were more flexible, less expensive,
and easier to update than conventional models,
demonstrating the potential advantages of VRML to
professional practice.
VRML as a simulation technique
VRML is defined as “…a file format for describing 3D
interactive worlds and objects…” [29]. It is important at
this point to establish why VRML was selected as a
simulation technique for this study.
The particular interest of this investigation is in
the potential of VRML to facilitate wider design
communication between professionals and users. VRML
enables design practitioners to exploit existing software
tools and to disseminate models via the Internet. This has
implications for increasing participation in design
processes. The study is concerned with investigating the
validity of VRML in this context and in particular its
ability to replicate “real world” environmental cognitive
experience.
A recent review of the research literature on
simulation of urban settings using virtual environments
indicates that VRML has received increasing attention
since 1995. Bourdakis [3] concluded that the limitation of
VRML for large-scale models include design related and
implementation related problems. Kaiser [16] investigated

limitations of desktop virtual environments. These
limitations included a perceptual conflict as viewers of
VRML environments are simultaneously aware of a two
dimensional screen whilst experiencing a three
dimensional environment. However, Bourdakis [3]
studied aspects of representation rather than the
behavioural responses of users. One aim of this study is to
establish the validity of VRML simulations in
representing real environments through the measurement
of participants’ cognitive responses.

Research Design
We chose to measure the Kaplans’[17] predictors of
cognitive-based
preference
including
legibility,
coherence, mystery and complexity and Golledge &
Stimson’s [12] cognitive distance ability and compare
participants responses for VRML and real landscapes.
This part of our research was designed to explore the
influence of the following variables: environmental
display (i.e., real and VRML model), gender, and design
background.
A post-test-only experimental design was
employed [4, 6, 5], using two equivalent groups (control
and experimental groups). The control group received a
real-site experience, while the experimental group
received a VRML experience. Post-test measurements of
preference variables were observed.
The environmental setting was selected because
of its potential to provide a cognitive experience, which
would enable participants to respond to questions
regarding cognitive-based preference and distance
estimation.

Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 37 undergraduate and
postgraduate students, 14 females and 23 males of which
14 have design background and 23 have non-design
background. All participants were students at Sheffield
University. The students participated in the investigation
as volunteers. The sample was chosen using stratified
probability sampling, from different sub-populations
including different ethnic groups, different backgrounds,
and different interest groups. The sample was assigned
into two groups by stratified probability sampling
including a control group (P.E., N=19 receiving no
experimental treatment), and an experimental group
(V.E., N=18 receiving experimental treatment).
Stimuli
The environmental display used in this
investigation included two connected urban spaces within
the Sheffield University Campus. The rationale of
selecting the university campus is based on Danford &
Willems [8] criteria. These criteria include its
homogeneity of design; its relative isolation from external
environments;
accessibility
and
proximity
for
participants. The two connected spaces may be spatially

classified into two different types of urban spaces
including semi-enclosed urban space, and semi-open
urban space.
The stimuli set for the control group (P.E.) was
the actual environment of two connected urban spaces.
The stimuli set for the experimental group (V.E.) was a
VRML simulation model of the same urban spaces. The
desktop V.E. system included hardware, software, and
geometry database.
The VRML browser enabled participants to
navigate through the model using a standard mouse in 6
degrees of freedom including 3-D movement, and 3-D
rotational options. Participants could select movement
and rotational options by clicking a number of buttons
displayed at the bottom of the display monitor. They
could move forward and backward, to left and to right,
and up and down. Movement options included rotation
about X, Y & Z-axes.
Procedure
The experiment was conducted during May
1998. P.E. participants received on-site guided group
sessions (N= 5). Each percipient was provided with a data
collection form, writing pad, a pencil/pen and an eraser.
The data collection form included a brief introduction
about the objectives of the test and summary of the
procedure. Participants were asked to provide some of
their personal data including gender, age group, their
background, familiarity with the environmental display,
and familiarity with using personal computers.
Participants received a guided on-site tour in
which they were asked to spend 10 minutes in each of the
two spaces to move around. In each of the two spaces,
participants were asked to rate each of the four Kaplan &
Kaplan’s cognitive variables using 5 point rating scale
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (very much). The
‘Coherence’ was described as ‘do the elements of the
space fit together well and logically in harmony?’.
‘Legibility’ was characterised as ‘how easy it is to find

Coherence
Legibility
Complexity

Space 1: Enclosed setting
Control
Experimental
2.7368 (0.9912)
3.2222 (1.0033)
4.2105 (1.0317)
4.0000 (1.0290)
2.7895 (0.9763)
2.3889 (0.6978)

one at a time in a lab-like environment, participants were
provided with an office chair, a data collection form, a
pencil/pen, an eraser, and a writing pad. They received 5minute instructions on how to use the input device in
navigating. Functions of the navigation buttons were
demonstrated. They found difficulty at the very beginning
but within few minutes, most of them mastered the
navigation tools. They were asked to navigate in each of
the two spaces for 10 minutes and rate each of the four
Kaplan & Kaplan’s cognitive variables using the same 5point scale used in the P.E. case. The experience of the
participants can be described as navigating through a real
setting whilst looking through the viewfinder of a camera
(170-cm above the ground level). Participants reported
difficulties in navigation as they frequently “went
through” walls because of a lack of “collision detection”
in the VRML model. This problem could have been
avoided using other VRML browsers but with the
disadvantage of slower rendering rates, and longer
response time.

Results
Cognitive data collected from both groups including
Kaplan & Kaplan’s cognitive variables rating scales and
distance estimation was analysed descriptively by
calculating the tendencies and dispersions of each
variable. Between group agreements and disagreements
are analysed using Independent Samples t-Test statistics.
Within Group responses
Results of Kaplan & Kaplan’s cognitive
variables are described in Table (1). Results show that
participants in VRML saw the enclosed setting as more
coherent (M = 3.22, SD = 1.00) than those who were in
the control group (M = 2.74, SD = 0.99), however
participants in control group saw the semi-open setting as
more coherent (M = 3.42, SD = 0.90) than those who
experienced it in VRML (M = 2.94, SD = 0.87).
Space 2: Semi-open setting
Control
Experimental
3.4211 (0.9016)
2.9444 (0.8726)
3.9474 (0.8481)
3.4444 (0.9218)
3.4211 (1.3464)
3.2222 (0.9428)

2.8421 (0.9582)
2.9444 (1.0556)
3.2632 (0.9912)
3.7222 (0.8948)
Mystery
Table (1) Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) as a function of both sample group and space type.

your way around in this space?’ ‘Complexity’ was
illustrated as ‘to what extent can the space be described as
a complex space or containing a lot of elements (e.g.,
trees, fences, signs, etc.) of different kinds?’. ‘Mystery’
was presented as ‘does the space promise more to be seen
as you walk deeper into it?’. Participants were asked at
the end of the in-site test to estimate both the distance of
one element from a fixed standpoint, and the height of a
particular element from the same standpoint.
V.E. participants were asked individually to
perform the same task in a computer laboratory equipped
with the Desktop V.E. system. Participants did the test

Results indicate that participants in VRML saw
the horizontal distance longer (M = 148.61, SD = 109.03)
than those who estimated it in the control setting (M =
135.578, SD = 8.73). However, VRML participants saw
heights as lower (M = 19.50, SD = 11.73) than those who
estimated it in the control setting (M = 22.47, SD = 16.87)
Between-Group Responses
The differential between-groups data were
analysed on comparative basis using the IndependentSamples T- by examining the variance and mean
difference of ratings for each preference variable between

the two groups. Because it is desirable to reject the
statistical null hypothesis of no significant differences
between the response groups, it was considered more
appropriate to report significance levels of ρ ≤ 0.150 to
minimise the risk of Type II error (i.e., rejecting a
scientific hypothesis when it is true) [2: 159, 5: 393]
Kaplan & Kaplan’s cognitive variables:
The result of t-test of independence showed that
for the semi-enclosed space there was a significant
difference between the ratings of both groups for the
‘coherence’ variable (P < 0.150). However, results reveal
no significant difference between the two groups in other
cognitive variables including ’legibility’, ‘complexity’,
and ‘mystery’ (P > 0.150).
On the other hand, in the semi-open space,
results of the same statistical test indicate that there was a
significant difference (P < 0.150) between ratings of the
participants of both groups in ‘coherence’, ‘legibility’,
and ‘mystery’. Ratings for the ‘complexity’ variable
showed no significant difference (P > 0.150).
Table (2) depicts F-test and t-test results.

group, results reveal no significant difference between
estimations of both designers and non-designers (P >
0.15).
Effect of gender on cognitive distance
Table (2) illustrates that different genders in the
experimental group did not show significant difference in
exploration and understanding of the semi-enclosed (P >
0.15). However, in the control group there was a
significant difference between genders in coherence
variable (P < 0.05) and no significant differences in the
other Kaplan & Kaplan’s variables (P > 0.15). On the
other hand, in the semi open space, both genders in the
control group show significant difference in mystery (P <
0.10) and no significant difference in the case of any other
variable. Males and females in the experimental group
show significant difference in coherence (P > 0.10).
Independent samples t-test indicates that in
distance estimation, there is no significant difference
between males and females in the control group (P >
0.15) while a significant difference does exist between
males and females in the experimental group (P < 0.15).

Space 1: Enclosed setting
Space 2: Semi-open setting
Control
Experimental
Control
Experimental
Coherence
2.197 (0.042)***
1.344 (0.198)
0.489 (0.631)
-2.039 (0.058)**
Legibility
1.151 (0.266)
-0.918 (0.372)
-0.201 (0.843)
-0.222 (0.827)
Complexity
-1.221 (0.239)
-1.311 (0.208)
0.326 (0.748)
-0.603 (0.555)
Mystery
0.434 (0.670)
-0.638 (0.533)
1.989 (0.063)**
0.939 (0.362)
Table (2) Results of independent sample T-test (equality of means) and their significance (in parentheses) between males and
females sub-groups
* ρ ≤ 0.150

** ρ ≤ 0.100

*** ρ ≤ 0.050

Distance and Height Estimations
Results of t-test of independence indicate no
significant difference between the VRML group and the
control group in distance estimation (P > 0.150) and
height estimation (P > 0.150)
Effect of Design background on cognitive distance
Looking at the responses of both designers and nondesigners sub-groups in the experimental group, we find
that results suggest no significant difference between both
sub-groups in Kaplan & Kaplan’s variables (P > 0.150).
This result tends to be consistent for both semi-enclosed
and semi-open spaces. On the other hand, participants in
the control group show some disagreements. Ratings for
‘coherence’ are significantly different between designers
and non-designers (P < 0.150) in the semi-enclosed
space, similarly, ratings for ‘legibility’ are significantly
different (P < 0.050) in the case of semi-open space.
Results indicate that there is no significant
difference in distance estimations between designers and
non-designers sub-groups whether in control or
experimental main groups (P > 0.15). Variances in
distance estimations between both sub-groups were not
significantly different (P > 0.15). For height estimations,
results indicate a considerably high significant difference
(P < 0.001) in measurements between designers and nondesigners in the control group. For the experimental

Measurements of height estimation show very high
significant difference in variances between males and
females in both control and experimental groups (P <
0.01 & P < 0.05 respectively). There was a significant
difference between height estimations of both males and
females in the control group (P < 0.15), however this
difference does not exist in the experimental group (P >
0.15).

Discussion
We have sought to investigate the extent to which
desktop VRML could develop cognitive knowledge of the
environmental display encountered compared with the
real setting. For the semi-enclosed space, immediate
understanding (coherence) of the stimuli seems to be
significantly different between real VRML displays
however inferred understanding (legibility) of the same
space in real environment is not significantly different
from the VRML. On the other hand, there was no
significant difference between both environments whether
in immediate (complexity) or inferred (mystery)
explorations.
For the semi-open space, results imply that both
immediate and inferred understanding of the display in
real environment is different from VRML. Inferred
exploration in both environments is different. Participants
in VRML could develop immediate exploration cognitive

learning that is no different from the participants in real
environment.
In development of cognitive distance, it seems
that the relative spatial separation of objects in a cognitive
map of a real environment is not significantly different
from a VRML model. Participants in VRML could
provide cognitive distance estimations that are equivalent
to their counterparts in real environments.
Environmental cognition of Designers v Non-designers
The second question was how different is the
spatial cognition between designers and non-designers
participating in both real and VRML experiences. This
study reveals that in VRML, both designers and nondesigners did not manifest major differences in their
understanding and exploration, immediate or inferred, of
both semi-enclosed and semi-open spaces. On the other
hand, designers and non-designers in real environment
show disagreement in their immediate understanding of
the semi-enclosed space, and their inferred understanding
of the semi-open space.
Our results imply that in real environment, nondesigners’ spatial understanding of horizontal separation
between the two elements were not different from
designers’. In VRML, results show that cognitive
understanding of distances is not different between
designers and non-designers. In cognitive understanding
of heights, we can conclude that in the studied
environmental display, there is a remarkable difference in
understanding of both designers and non-designers. That
difference does not exist in VRML where both designers
and non-designers did not show a significant difference in
their height estimations.

VRML in both the semi-enclosed and semi-open spaces.
This study shows that for inferred exploration (i.e.,
mystery) in the semi-open space both genders show
disagreement in the real environment and no noticeable
disagreement in VRML. However, in the semi-enclosed
space they did not show any remarkable disagreement
whether in real environments or VRML.
For interpreting spatial relationships between
elements in real environment and VRML, this
investigation indicate that in the real environment, both
genders did not agree on interpreting the vertical height of
the element. In VRML, both genders could interpret the
simulated height without disagreement; however, they did
not interpret the distance without disagreement.
Spatial cognition in desktop VRML
Kaplan & Kaplan’s model: Coherence, complexity,
legibility and mystery:
Analysis of results, hence, indicates that VRML recorded
a degree of success in providing immediate information
for exploration independent on space type, however, it did
not succeed in providing immediate information for
understanding. Results demonstrate that VRML was
successful enough to provide inferred information for
both understanding (legibility) and exploration (mystery),
however this success was not consistent regarding space
type. Table (3)
Cognitive Distance
The second question we sought to answer is to see how
experience in VRML could provide participants with
enough information to decide the relative separation of

Space 1: Enclosed Space
Space 2: Semi-Open Space
Understanding
Exploration
Understanding
Exploration
Coherence *
Complexity **
Coherence *
Complexity **
Immediate
Mystery **
Legibility *
Mystery *
Inferred, predicted Legibility **
Table (3) Projecting VRML simulation information on Kaplan & Kaplan (1989) preference matrix for both
spaces (1 & 2)
Variables labelled with (**) illustrate consistent successful information provided by the VRML simulation.
Variables labelled with (*) illustrate non-successful information provided by the VRML simulation.

Environmental cognition of Males v Females
The third inquiry concerns the differences
between spatial cognition of both males and females in
the two environments. Our results show that in the semienclosed space, males and females had different
immediate understanding of the space in the real
environment, however both sub-groups did not show
difference in VRML model. On the other hand, in the
semi-open space, the opposite happened. Males and
females did not show agreement in immediate
understanding in the virtual environment, while their
counterparts in real environment did. We have yet to do
further analysis to establish the precise nature and
significance of gender differences.
For inferred understanding (legibility) and
immediate exploration (complexity) both genders did not
show any disagreement whether in real environment or

objects in a cognitive map compared with real
environment experience.

Conclusion
The implications of this study may highlight the potential
of VRML as an environmental simulation technique for a
number of reasons. The VRML model consistently
provided immediate information for exploration of the
two spaces in this study. This information was not
significantly different from information obtained from
experiencing the real environment. The VRML model
provided information for both understanding and
exploration for one of the two spaces. We may imply that
the VRML simulation used in this investigation could be
a valid environmental simulation technique with some
limitations.

VRML could have considerable advantages. The
potential of VRML as a simulation medium used in this
study has the following characteristics:
1. As a simulation medium, it could control possible
factors affecting the spatial cognition of a place.
2. It created a 3-D interactive virtual environment that –
to some extent- replicates a sense of navigation
through a real environment.
3. Participants have options that may not be available
in reality (e.g., flying over) that provide new
experience that may enhance their behavioural
responses.
4. Being Internet-oriented, VRML files can be uploaded
to and downloaded from the World Wide Web
enhancing the possibility of social surveys.
VRML reported in this study shares other simulation
media in the limitation of environmental encounter to
visual experience only. The VRML technique used here
has some particular limitations. This study is limited to
two spatial categories only (i.e., enclosed and semi-open
urban spaces) and a particular typology of spaces (spaces
within a university campus). It lacks larger sample of
landscapes from a variety of types. The population was
limited to postgraduate and undergraduate university
students. The accessible population for our study was
restricted only to those who are familiar with personal
computers. Finally results are affected by the limitations
hardware and software configurations used in this study.
REFERENCES
1. Appleyard, D. (1977). Understanding Professional Media. In
I. A. J. F. Wohlwill (Ed.), Human Behavior and Environment:
Advences in Theory and Research (Vol. 2, pp. 43-88). New
York: Plenum Press.
2. Blalock, H. M. (1972). Social statistics (Revised edition).
Tokyo: McGraw Hill.
3. Bourdakis, V. (1997). The future of VRML on large urban
models. Proceedings of the 4th. UK Virtual Reality Special
Interest Group Conference, Uxbridge.
4. Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and
quasi-experimental designs for research. Chicago, IL: Rand
McNally College Pub.
5. Christensen, L. B. (1994). Experimental methodology (6th.
ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
6. Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasiexperimentation: Design &analysis issues for field settings.
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally College Pub.
7. Craik, K. H. (1968). The comprehension of the everyday
physical environment. American Institute of Planners, 34(1), 2737.
8. Danford, S., & Willems, E. P. (1975). Subjective responses to
architectural displays: A question of validity. Environment and
Behavior, 7(4), 486-516.
9. Evans, G. W. (1980). Environmental cognition. Psychological
Bulletin, 88(2), 259-287.
10. Evans, G. W., & Garling, T. (1991). Environment,
cognition, and action: The need for integration. In T. Garling &
G. W. Evans (Eds.), Environment, cognition, and action: An
integrated approach (pp. 3-13). New York: Plenum Press.
11. Golledge, R. G. (1987). Environmental cognition. In D.
Stokols & I. Altman (Eds.), Handbook of environmental
psychology (pp. 131-174). New York: Wiley.
12. Golledge, R. G., & Stimson, R. J. (1987). Analytical
behavioural geography. London: Croom Helm.

13. Hall, A. (1996). Assessing the Role of Computer
Visualization in Planning Control: A Recent Case Study. Paper
presented at the third Design and Decision Support Systems:
Architecture and Urban Planning Conference, Spa: Belgium.
14. Henry, D. (1992). Spatial perception in virtual
environments: Evaluating an architectural application.,
Unpublished master’s thesis, HITL, University of Washington,
Washington, Seattle.
15. Ittleson, W. (1973). Environmental perception and
contemporary perceptual theory. In W. Ittelson (Ed.),
Enviroment and cognition (pp. 1-20). New York: Seminar.
16. Kaiser, M. K. (1996). High-power graphic computers for
visual simulation: A real-time rendering revolution. Behavior
Research Methods: Instruments and Computers, 28(2), 233-238.
17. Kaplan, R., & Kaplan, S. (1989). The Experience of Nature:
A Psychological Perspective. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
18. Kaplan, S., & Kaplan, R. (Eds.). (1982). Humanscape:
Environments for People. Ann Arbor: Michigan: Ulrich’s Books,
Inc.
19. Kitchin, R. M. (1994). Cognitive maps: What are they and
why study them? Journal of Environmental Psychology, 14(1),
1-19.
20. Lee, T. R. (1970). Perceived distance as a function of
direction in the city. Environment and Behavior, 2(1), 40-51.
21. Lowrey, R. A. (1970). Distance concepts of urban residents.
Environment and Behavior, 2(1), 52-73.
22. Moore, G. T. (1979). Knowing about environmental
knowing: The current state of theory and research on
environmental cognition. Environment and Behavior, 11(1), 3370.
23. Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., & Jones, D. M. (1997).
Navigating buildings in desk-top virtual environments:
Experimental investigations using extended navigational
experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3(2),
143-159.
24. Sadalla, E. K., & Staplin, L. J. (1980). The perception of
traversed distance: Intersections. Environment and Behavior, 12,
167-182.
25. Shuttleworth, S. (1980). The use of photographs as an
environment presentation medium in landscape studies. Journal
of Environmental Management, 11(1), 61-76.
26. Siegel, A. W., & White, S. H. (1975). The Development of
Spatial Representations of Large Scale Environments. In H. W.
Reese (Ed.), Advances in Child Development and Behavior
(Vol. 10, ). New York: Academic Press.
27. Turner, P., & Turner, S. (1997). Distance estimation in
minimal environments. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the
4th. UK Virtual Reality Special Interest Group Conference,
Uxbridge.
28. Vazquez, J. A., & Martin, E. (1995). Computer models
versus architectural scale models. In S. Hernandez & C. A.
Brebbia (Eds.), Visualization and Intelligent Design in
Engineering and Architecture (pp. 183-190). Southampton:
Computational Mechanics Publications.
29. VRSIG. (1996). The Virtual Reality Modeling Language
Specification.
:
http://vrml.sgi.com/movingworlds/spec/index.html.
30. Wilson, P. N., & Foreman, N. (1993). Transfer of
information from virtual to real space: Implications for people
with physical disability, Proceedings of the First Eurographics
Workshop on Virtual Reality (pp. 21-25). Aire-la-Ville,
Switzerland: Eurographics Association.
31. Wilson, P. N., Foreman, N., & Tlauka, M. (1997). Transfer
of spatial information from a virtual to a real environment.
Human Factors, 39(4), 526-531.

