A Volumetric Approach to Visualize Holographic Reconstructions
Matthias König, Joachim Böttger, Oliver Deussen, and Thomas Strothotte
Department of Simulation and Computer Graphics
Otto-von-Guericke University of Magdeburg
Universitätsplatz 2, D-39106 Magdeburg, Germany
{koenigjjboettgejdeussenjtstr}@isg.cs.uni-magdeburg.de
Abstract
In synthetic holography, the emphasis has been on numerical simulation methods for the recording and reconstruction processes, but methods to visualize the calculated results are yet underdeveloped. We show how volume slicing
and volume rendering using a threshold for translucency
can be applied to synthetic holography. Results of the
three-dimensional visualization of the reconstruction are
presented, thereby illustrating the usefulness of the threshold operator.
Keywords:

Scientific visualization, synthetic holography,
reconstruction.

focus points and that volume rendering using a threshold
operator for translucency exposes the shape of the object
in three dimensions.
The paper is organized as follows: First, we briefly discuss optical and synthetic holography. Then we exemplify
related work and explain our approach to simulate and visualize the hologram reconstruction. We discuss results
and close with an outline of future work.

2 Optical and synthetical holography
Holography is a method for three-dimensional imaging of
objects. Dennis Gabor presented holography for the first
time in 1948 [5].

1 Introduction and motivation
In synthetic holography, a number of methods and tools for
computing holograms and holographic images exist. These
tools are commonly used for calculating the diffraction
properties of holograms. The visualization of the reconstruction in depth is not the primary task of such programs,
although two-dimensional reconstructions are usually performed. Tools specialized in visualizing three-dimensional
holographic reconstructions are missing. In this work we
describe such a tool and show that it allows a better spatial
understanding of the holographic reconstruction and circumvents the time-consuming and material-wasting optical verification of synthetic holograms.
The reconstruction of a two-dimensional object like a
thin plate which is parallel to the hologram plane appears
sharp only at a distinct distance to the hologram. If this
distance is known, a two-dimensional visualization is sufficient. The visualization of a three-dimensional object
poses new challenges: parts of the object appear sharp at
a specific distance where other parts appear blurred. To
discover the shape of the reconstructed object, it is necessary to find the sharp parts and to visualize them in a
three-dimensional view.
In this paper we approach the visualization of holographic reconstruction using three-dimensional volumetric
methods. We will show that volume slicing helps to find

Recording:
reference beam

object beam
hologram
object

(a)
Reconstruction:
reference wave
viewer

hologram
virtual image

(b)

Figure 1: Recording (a) and reconstruction (b)

As illustrated in Figure 1 holography is a two-step process. In the recording step a coherent light wave is split in
two beams. One beam illuminates the object to be imaged,
the other beam — called reference wave — hits directly
the holographic plate. The waves reflected by the object

are called object wave. The interference pattern of object
wave and reference wave is recorded on the holographic
plate and constitutes the hologram (see Figure 1(a)).
In the reconstruction step, the hologram (suitably processed) is illuminated with another reference wave. The
reference wave is diffracted by the interference pattern of
the hologram. Part of the diffracted wave is an identical
copy of the object wave of the recorded object. Looking
at the hologram, the viewer gets the impression of a threedimensional object, the virtual image (Figure 1(b)).
In synthetic holography, the optical processes are (partially) replaced by numerical calculations performed by the
computer.
To record a synthetic hologram, the object and the reference wave are described by their physical properties. For
each object point the amplitude and phase of the emitted
light is given in the form of a data set. With this description various methods for calculating the interference pattern of the hologram exist (e.g. [4] [10]). The computed
hologram can either be transferred to a holographic film
which is reconstructed optically in an experimental setup
or be reconstructed synthetically.

3 Related work
Programs like the optical cad system DigiOpt [1] and
ImageH [12] compute two-dimensional visualizations of
holographic reconstructions. This is done by calculating
the amplitude and phase of each point p in a plane parallel
to the hologram in distance z0 by evaluating Eq. 1. The
intensity of each point in this plane results in an image.
If the hologram displays a two-dimensional object, this
reconstructed object will focus only in a distinct depth
which equals to the distance of the object at recording time.
For all other distances the object will be blurred. Figure 3
shows a hologram and two images of reconstruction in different depths.
For three-dimensional objects recorded in the hologram,
only the points belonging to the object will appear sharp in
a reconstruction plane. Other tools developed for optical
design are not much advanced.
For educational purposes, The Optics Project (TOP)
points out the possibilities of three-dimensional visualization in optics [3]. TOP provides interactive visualization of
fundamentals of optics, e.g. Fresnel diffraction of a single
and a double slit, but provides no volume visualization of
hologram reconstruction.

y’
y
x’

H

r
p’

α

p
x

z0
z

Figure 2: Presumed geometric relationship between
object and hologram H for solving the Kirchhoff diffraction integral

For synthetical reconstruction, the hologram is given as
two-dimensional complex valued field. Additionally the
parameters of the reference wave are given. The illumination of the hologram with the reference wave is simulated
by evaluation of the Kirchhoff diffraction integral (cf. [7]),
U  p =

1
iλ

Z
S

u0  p0 

expikr
cosαds:
r

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(1)

or its approximations (see Figure 2). Here, U  p is the
electric field strength at the point p. U  p yields from the
field strength u0  p0  contributed from each point p0 of the
hologram plate H, λ is the wavelength, r the distance between p and p0 and α the angle between p0 , p and the
incident illumination wave. The intensity of U  p constitutes the image of the reconstructed object.

Figure 3: Example of a two-dimensional visualization of
hologram reconstruction: (a) original object
(b) hologram, (c) sharp reconstruction focusing the object, and (d) blurred reconstruction

4 Visualization of hologram reconstruction
The three-dimensional interactive visualization of the
holographic reconstruction is performed by computing a
volumetric data set; the difficulty to overcome, as indicated
above, is the blurring effect. This is done by calculating a
set of two-dimensional images parallel to the hologram using the Fresnel transform
U x; y =

expikz
iλz

Z Z

∞

,∞

Calculation of the volumetric data set and its visualization are separated in different modules. The calculation
module runs as a server process on a single machine, the
visualization modules can run as a client process on different computers (see Figure 5). Each client process sends an

calculation

u0 x0 ; y0 

Fresnel transform
(server)

ik
02
02
0 0
x , x  + y , y   dx dy
 exp 2z

output

input

(2)
hologram

that approximates the Kirchhoff diffraction integral, where
z runs from the chosen zs to ze in steps of length dz. These
images are combined to form a volumetric data set (see
Figure 4).

volume data set

parameter
send

return

volume rendering
(client)

visualization

hologram

volume slicing

reference wave

x

(client)

y

z
zs dz

Figure 5: Architecture of the software

ze

Figure 4: Calculation of the volumetric data set

The data set consists of scalar intensity values depending on their position in space. We normalize the data and
map the intensities to 256 grey values. Various volume
visualization techniques are applicable to the data space
[9] [6]. To visualize the holographic reconstruction, we
found volume slicing and volume rendering to be appropriate methods.
Interactive volume slicing offers good possibilities to
identify the foci of the reconstructed image. In this way
we achieve impressions of the object coded in the hologram. Our system provides three views exhibiting the intensity of the electric field on each slicing plane and one
view displaying the cutting planes in three dimensions to
enforce the impression of the reconstruction. The cutting
planes are moved interactively through the volume data set.
Volume rendering provides the employment of translucency. Therefore, we defined a threshold operator that determines what is transparent and what is opaque.
The techniques described above are implemented in
C++ on Silicon Graphics workstations. For the threedimensional volume visualization we use the graphics libraries OpenGL [8] and VTK [11]. By using graphics
hardware supporting three-dimensional textures [2] we obtain a speed-up for the rendering process.

image depicting the hologram and a parameter set needed
for computing the volumetric data set to the server. The
parameter set contains hologram resolution, start and end
distance and the step value for the calculation of the Fresnel transforms (see Figure 4: zs , ze and dz). The server
program computes the Fresnel transforms and returns the
requested volume data to the client. Now the client is able
to interactively display the data set.

5 Results
In Figures 6–9 we show reconstruction results of two holograms, one displaying a rectangle which is parallel to
the hologram plane, the other displaying a line in threedimensional space. In both cases the hologram consisted
of 128x128 points, the calculated volumetric data sets consisted of 128x128 pixels and 64 layers. On an SGI Onyx2
with two processors, the computation of the data sets requires ten minutes each, the volume visualization is performed in real-time.
In the first case a rectangle was placed in a far distance
compared to its extensions. Figure 6 illustrates volume
slicing through the intensity field which was generated as
described in Section 4.
The upper left part of Figure 6 shows a cutting plane
which is parallel to the hologram plane. The chosen distance equals the distance of the object during recording, so
the result is a sharp reconstruction.

The upper right and the lower left parts of Figure 6
show slices which are perpendicular to the hologram plane.
Here, the focus plane of the object becomes apparent
through the focus of the two beams. The small white lines
drawn above the cutting planes help positioning them in
space.
In the lower right part of Figure 6 a three-dimensional
representation of the slices is shown.
Figure 7 depicts volume rendering of the reconstruction
field. Figures 7(a) – 7(c) show the same volume, while
increasing the translucency threshold. By this variation the
structure of the reconstructed rectangle becomes visible.
The figures demonstrate the optical effect of a wide focus area. The reconstructed object seems to have a spatial
extension in the third dimension. This results from the far
distance to the hologram plane during recording.
The reconstruction of a line inclined in space is demonstrated in Figure 8. The line is composed of a number of
points. Here, the cutting planes are positioned in a way that
the focus area of the points is perceived. The upper right
part shows a slice through all points of the line.
The effect of an alteration of the transparency threshold for displaying the intensity field is shown in Figure 9.
Again, the reconstruction of the points becomes visible. In
Figure 9(c) the positions of the different points in space can
be detected.

6 Conclusion and future work
In this paper, we applied volume visualization techniques
like volume slicing and rendering to holographic reconstructions. The results shown in Section 5 demonstrate the
usefulness of these techniques during exploration of holographic reconstructions. In contrast to the so far used twodimensional techniques, the user is able to detect spatial
patterns, like focus planes, directly.
In the future we will apply further techniques for volume visualizing to hologram reconstructions. This includes more sophisticated methods to tune the visualization like choosing the translucency threshold automatically. This is needed to remove the blurring effect. The resulting reconstruction will then be saved as a set of points
in three-dimensional space. This will enable subsequent
post-processing steps that help for example optimizing the
holograms.
An application of our methods for the visualization of
holographic recording and reconstruction is prepared for
educational purposes. The interactivity of our approach
should be able to help understanding the physical background of holography. Future work will investigate such
possibilities.

References
[1] H. Aagedal, S. Teiwes, and T. Beth. Design of paraxial diffractive elements with the cad system digiopt.
In I. Cindrich and S. H. Lee, editors, Diffractive and
Holographic Optics Technology III, Proc. SPIE 2404,
pages 50–58. SPIE, 1995.
[2] K. Akeley. RealityEngine graphics.
Graphics, 27:109–116, August 1993.

Computer

[3] D. C. Banks, J. T. Foley, K. N. Vidimce, and M. Kiu.
Instructional software for visualizing optical phenomena. In Proc. IEEE Visualization, pages 447–
450. IEEE, 1997.
[4] O. Bryngdahl and F. Wyrowski. Digital holography –
computer-generated holograms. Progress in Optics,
28:1–86, 1990.
[5] D. Gabor. A new microscopic principle. Nature,
161:777–778, 1948.
[6] R.S. Gallagher, editor.
Computer Visualization
- Graphics Techniques and Engineering Analysis.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 1995.
[7] J. W. Goodman. Introduction to Fourier Optics.
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2nd edition, 1968.
[8] J. Neider, T. Davis, and M. Woo. OpenGL Programming Guide: The Official Guide to Learning
OpenGL. Addison-Wesley, 1993.
[9] G. M. Nielson. Modeling and visualizing volumetric and surface-on-surface data.
In Focus
on Scientific Visualization. Springer-Verlag, BerlinHeidelberg-New-York, 1993.
[10] A. Ritter, J. Böttger, O. Deussen, M. König, and Th.
Strothotte. Hardware-based rendering of full-parallax
synthetic holograms. Applied Optics, 38(8):1364–
1369, 1999.
[11] W. J. Schroeder, K. M. Martin, and W. E. Lorensen.
The Visualization Toolkit. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey, 1988.
[12] E. Zhang. Computer Holography: Theory, Algorithms, and Realization. PhD thesis, Ruprecht-KarlsUniversität Heidelberg, 1995.

Figure 6: Three-dimensional visualization of a holographic reconstruction by three orthogonal
cutting planes through the intensity field and
their spatial arrangement.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7: Volume rendering the intensity field of a hologram reconstruction with increasing translucency threshold: (a) low threshold, (b) and (c)
higher thresholds.

Figure 8: Non-orthogonal cutting planes through the
intensity field of a reconstructed line. In this
case the line was assembled out of a number
of points.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 9: Increasing the transparency threshold of the
intensity field enables identifying the object
coded in a hologram. Using a high threshold
causes only the focus points to remain.

