Distributed Information Sharing for Collaborative Systems
(DISCS)

Anderson N, Abdalla H S
Department of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering
Faculty of Computer Sciences and Engineering
De Montfort University, Leicester, UK.
Email: nell@dmu.ac.uk / ha@dmu.ac.uk
http://www.eng.dmu.ac.uk/concurrent/
Abstract
With the advent of global competition, greater
numbers of organisations require collaborations with
others. Concurrent engineering can provide a highly
effective framework for this collaboration. A Distributed
Object Oriented Concurrent Engineering System (DISCS)
focuses on the communication of data between the members
of a distributed project team.
Conceptually the
communication is the enabling factor; technologically the
use of the WWW and object oriented technologies. A
portfolio of collaboration support tools facilitates practical
mechanisms for information sharing within the distributed
enterprise, communication / conferencing for project teams,
configuration / version control and workflow structures.
DISCS effectively facilitates the virtual team, currently
within an engineering context.

Keywords
Concurrent
Engineering,
Object-Oriented
Programming, Java, XML, STEP, Object-Oriented
Database, Concept Mapping, VRML, Internet, WWW,
Virtual Team.

Introduction
The purpose of DISCS is to enable distributed project
teams who for which co-location is either very expensive or
impossible to share the benefits experienced by co-located

teams. The increase in collaborating organisations sharing
expertise to stay competitive leaves a void where previous
facilitating tools are minimal in function. Currently each
tool only provides part of the solution; they lack the
integrated completeness, which is a prime enabling factor.
Projects such as MONET [1] and Cyberview [2], are where
some of the founding concepts for DISCS are drawn. These
only concentrate on the sharing of data such as CAD
models. Assuming the sharing to be the enabling factor for
the communication of a distributed project team. DISCS
expands this to place retrieved data within a concept
framework [3, pp. 132-138], hence giving each piece of
data a context and increasing the coherence of the
information. Thus improving the communication between
members of the project team. This framework also assists
the generation of new concepts not just their retrieval,
tackling a conclusion of [4, p 11]; “Teams should encourage
the sharing of new ideas, brainstorming to solve a problem.”
The benefits which arrive from an improvement in the
communication of a distributed concurrent engineering team
are a reduction in costs, a reduction in time to market, an
improvement in business processes throughout the product
lifecycle, and an improvement in the final applicability to
market for the product. The entire lifecycle is considered
leading to these improvements.
The technologies chosen for the development of
DISCS are VRML [5], STEP [6], Java [7], XML [8, 9], and
an object oriented database [10]. These offer the potential
for a highly portable system. Distributed access introduces
a high likelihood of different platform usage throughout the

distribution.
IT investment in platforms cannot be
disregarded, in fact it should be exploited. An enabling tool
must bridge this gap to be of any real world use. Another
valid reason for their selection is the industries activity and
support for them, they are each the current technology in
their domain. Hence the functionality is still increasing
allowing a closer integration of the components.

Previous Background Work
As previously mentioned DISCS overcomes what is
considered the shortcomings of previous systems within this
problem domain. It is the integration and portability of the
sub system components, which increases the utility of such
a system. Previous systems [11, 12, 2, 4, 1, 13] have a
reduced integration of their component parts and a reduced
portability. This results in a lack of a context for the
information retrieved.
DISCS has relationships to projects, which in the past
have provided only part of solution to the communication
problem of the virtual team. However it also provides
benefits identified as desirable in recent / currently
undergoing projects such as CENTEX (Concurrent
Engineering Needs & Technologies Experimentation).

MONET
Facilitates the creation and operation of the virtual
team,
via
an
application
sharing
mechanism.
Technologically MONET [1] uses UNIX-BSD sockets and
TCP/IP protocols to provide the communications
infrastructure. Thus allowing X-Windows applications to
be shared by the members of a virtual team such as CAD,
art packages, and text windows. The information exchange
possible in this manner is relatively limited. The scope of
the system is restricted to a UNIX network; the portability is
hence limited to within this operating domain. Control is
achieved through floor control or chalk passing
mechanisms.

CENTEX
CENTEX [13] is the evaluation of the impacts of the
concurrent design process on product quality, costs and
time to market. A new generation radio system is the target
project to be evaluated. A combination of virtual cosimulation and workflow / process flow technologies are
used to create an Integrated Collaborative Working
Environment.

CYBERVIEW
Cyberview [2] was undertaken by the Department of
Industrial Engineering at Seoul National University and the
Department of Industrial Engineering at the University of
Iowa. It is an enabling system for distributed concurrent
engineering. It allows the distributed viewing of CAD
models with some simple textual mark-up information. It is
in essence a database of CAD models with the facility to
view them over the Internet.
The proposed DISCS will provide a far greater access
scope, instead of being limited to the UNIX network as in
MONET, the access is provided via a connection to the
Internet. This scope requires the platform portability of
DISCS, which is not present within MONET. In previous
work [11, 12, 2, 4, 1, 13] the connectivity between data
created in the various applications has little semantic linking
between them. DISCS allows a wide variety of connection
possibilities directly within the information, at the strongest
points of cognitive mapping.
CENTEX used the Mentor Graphics WorkXpert tool.
After user feedback, WorkXpert was implemented with the
introduction of a new graphical design process view based
on a hierarchical representation. DISCS emulates both this
structure and expands upon it to permit any linked structure
of the data. Conceptual ideas can be mapped / linked into a
process flow management display within DISCS, also
linkable, hence increasing the entry points into the system.
CENTEX identified a problem with the motivation of the
team to adopt the new methods. DISCS tackles this in
terms of simplicity of use, and cognitive understanding of
the retrieved information.
Cyberview’s mark-up information is of a limited scope,
a short textual annotation is all that is permitted. There is
no support for the initial phases of a concurrent engineering
lifecycle. DISCS takes this much further with an assisting
concept generation and viewing mechanism which can be
linked into any part of the CAD model. This enables the
initial phases of a concurrent engineering lifecycle. The
design is then linked into the initial ideas, creating a
cognitive map of the flow of concepts and designs within
the minds of the team members, greatly increasing the
understanding of the project among the team.

The Proposed System (DISCS)
Conceptual Overview
Through the linking of conceptual trains of thought to
a variety of information mediums ranging from sound,
video, images through to CAD data, the understanding of
designs can be enhanced. Virtually every component in the
system can be linked to another, hence providing a context
with which the retrieved information can be interpreted.
Another important aspect is the expansion of potential
users. Currently a sound knowledge in computer systems is
required to operate most facilitating tools. However with
DISCS a cognitively understandable concept mapping
system is used, derived from the Mind Mapping Technique
[3]. This makes the understanding of the data second
nature, the information and its relationships can be very
easily visualised.
If the system is easier to use for the target user
audience, it then allows a much greater flow of ideas into
the system. The variety of team members can be expanded
from the highly technically skilled group to form an IPD
(Integrated Product Development) Team [11, p102]. This
includes end product users, assembly teams, sales,
marketing, i.e. categories of people whose input makes a big
difference if captured early on in the product lifecycle.
With the more usual “over the wall” [11, p102] approach
this input would arrive at a much later stage when redesign
is costly and thus possibly omitted, resulting in a
substandard product. DISCS facilitates this early retrieval
of data with a tool, which provides a cognitively applicable
interface allowing the expansion of the possible user base.
The anonymity of many workers and a sense of lack of
importance in larger corporations are often due to their lack
of opportunities to contribute. This would also be assisted
as a side effect of involving more people early on in the
design stage of a project. The sense of ownership of the
project would be higher increasing motivation aspects. The

insight from views other than high level management can
easily be obtained; the value of this contribution should not
be under estimated.
The daily issues, which lack
consideration at the initial stages then, represent barriers
and problems later on in the lifecycle. These are now
identified at a stage where their rectification is of a lower
cost.
The benefits of the insight into a problem before
construction, has been shown before for example on 3D
models of pipe arrangements for chemical plants.
Maintenance teams can be taken through the expected
maintenance routine, virtually so that their input could be
obtained. However 3D modelling although compared to a
real world construction is extremely rapid, compared to an
overview driven conceptual analysis it is not. Obviously
detail cannot be considered at this level but the higher level
thought which may not usually be visible to the rest of the
team can be taken into account in the least amount of time.
More detailed viewpoints such as the 3D models can then
be linked into the system for review purposes. DISCS offer
various planes of detail for information to be presented; this
facilitates new team members with a system, which allows
them to gain the essence of project quickly, but also allows
them to delve into regions of greater detail if required.

Architectural Overview
The system is centred on the Internet protocol. This is
the primary link between components. This protocol of
communication was chosen for the target audience, which
ranges from the global distributed collaboration of
organisations, to the internal Internet solution within a
multi-site company.
The system has five main interconnected sub-systems.
At the heart of the system is an object oriented database, a
concept creation / viewing tool, CAD model creation,
VRML viewing of the CAD data, and a suite of
supplementary communication tools. Figure 1. below
shows the relationships between these components.

FIGURE 1: Architecture of the DISCS System

Database
The obvious database choice is between relational and
object oriented, due to the complexity of CAD data plus the
additional linking framework the choice was made to use an
object oriented database. The security aspects can also be
implemented in a more logical fashion with various levels
of locking. This flexibility is well suited to the multi-user
format the system will support.
The database essentially stores the CAD data to be
shared with a host of linked in supplementary information in
a wide variety of formats, from the concept maps produced
within the concept map tool, through to images, video,
audio, and even HTML documents.
The possible
information experience is limited only by the imagination of
the creator.

Sharing of CAD models - VRML
Information at the conceptual level is essential for
guiding a project in the correct direction during the early
phases and providing an overview of the work required.
This conceptual level can be used to browse through the
model, an essential element for an information server [12].

However this is lacking the technical detail and hence
communication of detail needed. The sharing of CAD
models poses a problem for viewing. The translators which
are required to translate between CAD formats increase in
number exponentially. A model needs to be used as a
medium; chosen for this task is STEP. CAD models are
translated into STEP then into VRML. As the support for
the STEP standard increases this will increase the future
scope and possibilities for the system. STEP is a platform
independent format aiding the portability aspect of the
system.
The intended VR mechanism is through VRML. The
source for the VRML worlds will be translated CAD
models; VRML is the chosen technology for a variety of
enabling factors [2]. The components are primarily being
based on their adaptation to the distributed aspects of the
system. I.e. for software the portability factors rank very
highly. VRML through common web-browser support is
highly portable. Various plug-ins can be downloaded for
most browsers on most platforms. This support allows the
CAD models to be viewed anywhere in the world where
there is access to the Internet. VRML also allows the
linking of nodes in a model to other URLs. These URLs
can be other VRML models allowing the nesting of models.
Concept maps can also be linked to, along with any other

commonly found web documents, text, graphics, sound etc.
Existing databases could be connected via an ODBC (Open
Database Connectivity) connection / bridge. Allowing a
change over from a legacy of stored models / file of a
project.
VRML is also flexible enough to accommodate the
various CAD formats once translated. Currently perceived
as a purely desktop based viewer. There is no reason why
specialist nodes / sites in the communicating team couldn’t
be set up to allow a more realistic and immersive
experience in terms of virtual reality coves / caves. These
allow the system to be used for after design applications.
Instead of storing a lot of technical inaccessible data, the
system is encouraging previously input data to be reused.
The reality level of VRML is sufficient for the system to be
used to provide a walk through of designs either for
iterative modification and review or even to provide the first
steps of training for future users of the product. This would
be cheaper than building real world models / simulators,
also somewhat more portable and modifiable.
VRML also allows the multi-participants existence in a
single world. Again increasing the concurrency and the
communication. If you want to show a person an aspect of
the world for discussion the ability to follow someone
around the world is invaluable. The use of more standard
natural communication is suggested to accompany this sort
of procedure. This approach can be termed the tour guide
and can be used to help new team members become
accustomed to the viewed product noting important
features. A basic mannequin represents each user.

STEP
STEP is an expanding technology, platform
independent, with industry backing. Apart from the
translation and transport medium within DISCS, the
expansion of STEP compliant applications means that data
stored in this way will be available to communicate this
information during the next generation of systems. Product
lifecycles often extend far beyond the operational life of the
applications, systems software and hardware. Its important
that a storage and translation medium should be able to
from the outset bridge these changes when they occur rather
than cause disruption upon change.

Conclusion
DISCS offers a wide range of benefits based on vastly
improving communication between team members. This
improvement in communication is derived through a linked
repository of globally accessible information. Related
information, concerning conceptual analysis, design, and
workflow processes can all be retrieved from each other.
This reinforces the understanding of the material retrieved
and the hence the communication of ideas between team
members. If the understanding of team members can all be
increased an extra emphasis on involving a wide range of
people at the earliest opportunity allows a variety of
common problems to be communicated to the rest of the
project team and dealt with at the point of lowest cost. A
lifecycle of problems can be identified at the beginning
stages, improving the number of change requests,
marketing, assembly, testing, usability, through to
ecological disposal of the product.

Other Components Overview
Translators
The system requires two points of translation from
CAD data to STEP data, which can then be stored. Then
for the viewing i.e. VRML this STEP data must be
translated into VRML worlds. This is opposed to the more
direct CAD format to format translation, which increases
exponentially with each new configuration. For each CAD
application a single translator to the STEP model is all that
is required as the basis for conversion to VRML. Hence
increasing the real world applicability and acceptance
criteria.

However DISCS offers the facilities to reuse this
information, basic training can be performed via the VRML
interface, maintenance teams can be given a run through of
the expected servicing routine before they have to encounter
it for real. Service manuals could be easily linked in to the
repository of information used to build the product ensuring
the accuracy of the data.
Unexpected changes to the project team later on in the
lifecycle can be more suitably dealt with; the concept maps
provide a clear overview of any product.
In conclusion DISCS offer the facilities to create
information repositories that have real world value,
throughout the entire concurrent engineering lifecycle, these
information repositories offer benefits in terms of reduced

costs, decreased turn around times, increased team-building
qualities, a reduced time to market and an increase in
applicability and quality. Hence improving both product
and business processes.

[5] Web 3D Consortium. Web 3D Consortium. [WWW].
Available from: http://www.vrml.org/ [Accessed March 1999].
[6] FOWLER, J. STEP For Data Management Exchange and
Sharing. Twickenham, Technology Appraisals, 1995. pp. 53-67.

Future Work
DISCS is an ongoing project and hence has various
outlets for the expansion of other considerations. The
virtual reality aspects can be taken to a higher level of
realism, this would reflect the general improvements which
could be made to a virtual world such as sound, nasal and
haptic (tactile) feedback.
In terms of other domains, DISCS could replace the
CAD model components with a software component
viewing system, this could be initially textual expanding to
a graphical representation. Hence reusing the linking
possibilities within DISCS.

References
[1] SRINISVAS K., et al. MONET: A multi-media System for
Conferencing and Application Sharing in Distributed Systems,
CERC-TR-RN-91-009, CERC Technical Report Series, West
Virginia University. Feb. 1992
[2] KIM C-Y., et al. Distributed Concurrent Engineering: InternetBased Interactive 3-D Dynamic Browsing and Mark-up of STEP
Data. Concurrent Engineering: Research and Applications,
March 1998, vol. 6 (pt. 1). pp. 53-70.
[3] BUZAN, T. The Mind Map Book. 2nd ed. London, BBC
Books, 1995.
[4] LONDONO F. et al. Co-ordinating a Virtual Team, Morgan
Town West Virginia, CERC Concurrent Engineering Research
Center Drawer 2000, West Virginia University. [No Date].

[7] FLANAGAN, D. Java in a Nutshell. 2nd ed. Sebastapol,
O’Reilly & Associates, Inc., 1997.
[8] CONNOLLY D., et al. The Evolution of Web Documents: The
Ascent of XML. World Wide Web Special Issue on XML, vol. 2
(pt. 4), Fall 1997. pp 119-128.
[9] REES, L. A brief Introduction the Mysteries of the Extensible
Mark-up Language. [WWW, Printed October 28th 1998]. pp. 18.
[10] BARRY, D. The Object Database Handbook. United States
of America , Wiley Computer Publishing, 1996. pp. 29-45.
[11] GAIENT A. Agility through Information Sharing: Results
Achieved in a Production Setting. Concurrent Engineering:
Research and Applications, June 1997, vol. 5 (pt. 2). pp. 101111.
[12] JAGANNATHAN, V., et al. Model Based Information
Access. In: Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Enabling
Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprise.
CERC-TM-93-007, IEEE Computer Press, April 1993. pp. 198212.
[13] CENTEX, Concurrent Engineering Needs & Technologies
Experimentation.
[WWW].
Available
from:
http://esoce.pl.ecp.fr/cenet/Information/cerelated/centex/Projectoverview.htm [Accessed
16th March 1999].

