Utilizing Desktop Virtual Reality to Enhance Visualization: Applied Projects from
the Department of Computer Graphics
James L. Mohler
Department of Computer Graphics
Purdue University
Abstract

Virtual reality technologies provide a unique method for
enhancing user visualization of complex three-dimensional objects and environments. By experience and
environmental interaction, users can more readily
perceive the dimensional relationships of objects typically portrayed via static multiview or pictorial representations. Until recently, many of the VR technologies
required significant computing power for adequate
delivery and provided realism that is often less than
actual. Alternatively, video-based VR technologies
overcome the two major limitations of true threedimensional VR technologies - computing horsepower
and realism. The focus of this contribution is to provide
background information on VR technology for the
improvement of spatial abilities, describe the advantages
of video-based VR technologies, and provide examples
showing how video-based VR can be used to enhance
visualization in education and training.
Keywords: visualization, virtual reality, QuickTime VR,
interaction, emersion, and multimedia, industry training,
education, projects.

Introduction
Spatial ability is a significant component of a variety
of disciplines and is often paramount for success in those
disciplines. Although researchers have defined spatial
ability in various ways, there is agreement that spatial
ability is vitally important to their respective disciplines.
As much of the literature suggests, experts from
seemingly unrelated fields share the commonality of
spatial ability, as Bertoline [1] reported. He stated that
spatial ability is important for success in biology [2],
chemistry [3], mathematics [4], and science [5].
Others, such as Gardner [6, 7], go beyond linking
spatial ability to discipline-based application only.
Gardner proposed a multifaceted model of intelligence
that suggested spatial abilities are one of seven major
components. He defined spatial intelligence as the ability
to think in pictures and images, the ability to perceive,

transform, and recreate different aspects of the visualspatial world. His definition also included sensitivity to
visual details, and the ability to draw or sketch ideas
graphically. Gardner’s explanation continued by stating
that key intelligences are not discontinuous, but
interrelated. For example, spatial intelligence coincides
with logical-mathematical, that is mathematical ability
and the ability to reason.
Nevertheless, without spatial abilities students are
often hindered in the learning environment and ultimately
within their chosen field [8]. Increasingly, research
supports the idea that spatial ability is a primary ability or
domain of knowledge, parallel to mathematical or verbal
skills.

Improving Spatial Ability
With the acknowledgement that spatial ability is
important, it is meaningful to identify the primary
implementations that have attempted to increase the
spatial abilities of students. Research findings point
toward several appropriate technologies that can be used,
as well as the shortcomings of previous methods. The
findings have also indicated a trend toward the increased
use of computer technology in the advancement of spatial
abilities.
Researchers have used numerous methods in an
attempt to teach and further spatial abilities, each with
varying levels of success. Traditional paper and pencil,
2D CAD, 3D CAD, 3D animation and computer games
have all been used in an attempt to improve students
spatial abilities. Although not an exhaustive list of
approaches, an increase in the capabilities of the desktop
computer has dramatically multiplied the various
strategies that can be employed. The most notable of
these evolutions have occurred within the last 10 years
with the emergence of the PC. Many computer-based
tools are well suited for visualization instruction and
remediation. The desktop computer also provides an
environment that allows for development and delivery of
both static and dynamic media [9]. The computer can

easily become an extension of the mind, allowing the
student to view their cognitive processes. Frequently, the
computer monitor becomes both a looking glass and a
tutor for mental processes.
However, the complexity of some environments can
add to the cognitive workload required of a student [10].
The mental focus should not be upon the digital tool.
Rather, emphasis should be placed upon exercising visual
abilities. The digital tools can become a hindrance to
learning, particularly upon first exposure. Suitably
designed digital tools must provide affordances and
conceptual clues that allow the student some relationship
to the real world so that they may easily operate within
the environment [11]. When a computer is used,
ultimately students must understand the environment and
the methods for controlling that environment.
Several of the methods employed for visual ability
improvement have led to important discoveries of mental
capacities that comprise cognitive spatial abilities, as well
as ways in which the student can improve those abilities.
As technology has improved, students have become more
able to readily externalize and exercise cognitive
processes with the technology, as long as the computer
and its interface do not interfere with the objectives for
learning.
Regardless of implementation, all the methods strive
to increase the student’s capability to mentally construct a
three-dimensional object, which is defined as
visualization. Secondly orientation, or the relationship of
the object to oneself, must also be cognitively realized.
The combination of these two components forms the
basis for spatial ability and the capacity for understanding
and manipulating three-dimensional mental imagery [12].
Yet, implementation of a learning strategy must also
consider learning styles. While one method may be
appropriate for some learners, that same method may be
completely inadequate for others. Large proportions of
learners may fall into a category that excels with a
particular style of instruction. Therefore, strategies must
coincide, or at least accommodate, various styles of
learning.
For example, Miller [13] noted the significant
differences between visual and haptic learners and how
the use of computer-generated models can assist learners
who fall in either category of learning. Albeit, Miller
noted that the results may have been affected by other
variables. However, he recommended the use of advance
technologies, if for nothing more than the motivational
and interest aspects that it induces. A significant variable
that contributes to learning is motivation. Advanced
technologies can increase student motivation toward
learning conceptual and applied information [14].

Virtual Reality & Spatial Visualization
One of the most promising technologies for
increasing student spatial abilities is virtual reality (VR)
technology. One of the detriments of other computerbased strategies is that the student is often distanced from
the environment or objects. The real power of VR
technology is that it allows people to expand their
perception of the real-world in ways that were previously
impossible [15]. As McLellan stated, VR is a cognitive
tool that allows dynamic and immediate interaction. The
interactivity inherent to VR is aimed at extending and
enhancing human cognitive abilities. Thus, it provides a
superb vehicle for enhancing and possibly improving
spatial abilities.
Ross and Aukstakalnis [16] proposed several
scenarios in which VR technologies could be used to
increase visual abilities. Recommendations made are
related to increasing a student’s ability of visualization
and orientation. It should be noted that orientation
includes not only the static relationship, but also the
dynamic relationship between the user and the
environment. Rotation and translation as well as the
controls for performing these actions on the viewer and
object(s) are included within this aspect of spatial ability.
As suggested, VR provides a superb vehicle for testing,
enhancing, and possibly improving both visualization and
orientation skills. However, more research is needed to
qualify and quantify the impact of its use.

VR Classification
The perception of VR technology often portrayed by
the media through movies and other sources reveals a
photo realistic environment, flawless in its representation
of reality. However, the desktop application of VR is far
from the complete and perfect representation of the real
world. All media is subject to three sets of constraints:
cognitive, structural, and technical. With VR, the most
significant set is the technical constraints.
Several technical limitations prevent the real-time
display of completely realistic environments with total
submersion on the desktop. Tremendous processing
requirements, high data rates, and expensive display
technologies limit the amount of realism that can be
provided. Although considerable research in hardware
and software development is taking place, technology has
not advanced to a stage that can provide the real-world on
the desktop. Yet, the purpose of VR is not to provide the
complete and exact representation of the real world on
the computer, although someday desktop-computing
power, attainable by the masses, may allow it. Today, VR

is about experience and interaction, not the simulation of
true reality or creating the surreal.
To determine the level of reality of VR systems,
several researchers are developing scales by which these
systems can be measured and compared. Thurman and
Mattoon [17] presented a model that classifies VR based
on three dimensions: verity, integration, and interface.
The verity dimension attempts to describe the level at
which the environment or the objects represent true
reality. The integration dimension describes how the user
is integrated and/or represented in the environment, and
the interface dimension describes how the user interacts
with the environment.
Today, an environment that provides the maximum in
all three dimensions has not been developed. However,
several technologies show promise in reaching the
maximum. Proprietary technologies and non-proprietary
technologies, such as VRML, provide a means for
creating virtual worlds. Yet, these technologies have
significant technical limitations and are far from reaching
the highest rating for verity, integration, or interface.
Most of the proprietary programs do provide high quality
virtual environments (high verity). Yet, they are often far
more costly than most educational institutions can afford
due to the processing power needed and the expense of
input and output devices. This is particularly true where
multi-workstation laboratory configurations are
concerned. VRML, which is far more cost effective,
provides a lack of realism (low verity) and requires
significant bandwidth considerations for delivery.
Additionally, the interface dimension of these tools is
often difficult to use and control. Thus, the tool has a
tendency to get in the way of developing spatial ability.
Although both these technologies provide true threedimensional environments a third evolving technology,
video-based VR, provides promise as it is significantly
less expensive to create, easier to deliver, and provides
photo realistic content. Due to the fact that it is a videobased technology, it is not based upon the real-time
delivery of three-dimensional data. Rather, it is composed
of snapshots of predefined views that give the illusion of
navigation within a three-dimensional environment, or
manipulation of a three-dimensional object.
Because video-based VR is based upon predefined
views, educators who use it can control the path of
motion through an environment, or the translation and
rotation of an object. Educators have complete control
over the pedagogical degrees of freedom within the
illusionary three-dimensional environment. A significant
detriment with other technologies is that students can
quickly become disoriented because of the infinite
freedom within the three-dimensional environment, that

is, the ability to manipulate objects and viewer
independently. By affixing either object or environment
in the VR clip, learners can more readily interact and
understand the presented materials. Limitless navigation
during learning can often defeat the educational
objectives [10].

Video-based VR Technologies
The most widely used video-based VR technology is
QuickTime VR (QTVR), which is an extension of
Apple’s QuickTime (QT) digital video file format. QTVR
movies share the same cross-platform playback capability
as the normal QT clips, which is a significant advantage
to using them. The true difference between normal linear
QT clips and QTVR clips is based on the way in which
the file is created and digitally written. Both contain
frame-differenced raster images that can be compressed
using a variety of compression algorithms.
QTVR movies can provide both egocentric and
exocentric content (albeit the two different types are
created in different ways). Using Apple’s terminology,
egocentric movies are called panoramas and exocentric
movies are termed object movies. Both of these QTVR
clips can be created using a digital camera in a real
environment, or they may both be digitally generated
using three-dimensional models or scenes as a
foundation.
In either scenario, the advantages that QTVR movies
offer are numerous. Since QTVR movies are based upon
rendered raster images, rather than live three-dimensional
data, the processing requirements for true photo-realistic
playback is quite low. In fact, processing requirements
are no more than those required for 10 to 15 second
linear, digital video clips. Additionally, due to the raster
nature of QTVR files, the digital file size is much
smaller, meaning that delivery over a network or even
within a CD-ROM format is much more responsive to the
learner or user.
Further, as QTVR is based upon the QT format,
another advantage is the large base of users who already
have the required software installed on their computers.
As the demographics site MediaMatrix [18] indicates,
QuickTime extensions are one of the top 50 software
components owned and installed on business computers.
Other strategies for VR implementation require special
software programs, browsers, or plug-ins that are not as
widely distributed. Indeed, many have special licensing
for distribution on multiple machines or multiple
platforms.

Applications for Visualization
Over the past four years, the Department of
Computer Graphics at Purdue University has been
actively developing education and training materials for a
variety of commercial companies, as well as for its own
students. Due to photo-realism, low bandwidth and data
rate requirements, and the ease of creation and delivery,
the department has implemented QTVR technology in a
variety of these projects. Additionally, the department is
successfully applying the technology to specific learning
situations that concern the enhancement and
improvement of visualization ability.

clips were integrated in several ways to help new and
existing employees understand the content more
efficiently as shown in Figure 1. One of the initial tasks
was the development of a series of VR clips that showed
every location within the plant. Learners could use both
navigable ego- and exocentric views to better understand
the layout of the facility.

Bethlehem Steel Corporation SOP Program
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation (BSC) contracted
the Department of Computer Graphics to assist them in
creating computer based training materials for their Burns
Harbor steel making facility. With a large retirement
turnover approaching, and with the current materials
being technologically out-of-date, BSC decided to take
the opportunity to upgrade its existing training and
documentation system to CD-ROM multimedia with
eventual migration to distributed intranet materials. BSC
envisioned a digital system that would utilize text,
graphics, sound, narration, digital video, and animation to
increase training efficiency, effectiveness and employee
motivation.
One of the principle reasons for the transition from
the existing text-based standard operating procedures
(SOP) to multimedia-based SOPs was the difficulty that
new employees had in visualizing the procedures,
processes, and equipment described in previous training
materials. BSC’s existing system was comprised of a
database containing systematic text instructions that
could be searched, edited and read by employees.
Although the text system seemed adequate for existing
employees, new employees had continual difficulty
understanding and putting into practice the information
presented. The difficulty was not the content, but in
visualization and interpretation of the content. With only
text-based information, new employees found it difficult
to understand the procedures without on-the-job
instruction. It was hoped that the new multimedia system
would help alleviate this problem due the graphical and
animated content it would contain.
To overcome the difficulties associated with
visualization of the processes, procedures, facility, and
equipment, each SOP was portrayed using static and
dynamic graphics, text, as well as vocal narration. VR

Figure 1. BSC employees can navigate the steel
making facility using egocentric and exocentric
viewpoints.
In addition to the VR clips that described the facility,
VR was used in appropriate places to help the employees
understand specific, critical processes and procedures, as
shown in Figure 2. For example, a crucial task is the
preparation of the casting machine. If the machine is not
precisely prepared for casting, malfunction is often the
result and frequently leads to the loss of money. In the

Figure 2. Proc edures and tasks may also be
represented with QTVR clips to aid in visualization.

most severe instances, errors in preparation can lead to
the loss of human life. The use of VR clips in these
procedures has increased accuracy and reduced
dangerous situations, such as steel breakouts, within the
plant.

the composition, is more readily understood, as shown in
Figure 4.

Material Science & Engineering
One of the difficulties in presenting scientific
content is that often the concepts being portrayed are
microscopic in detail. From biological cell structures to
the structures of atoms, learner understanding of the
content is often limited by the media that is being used to
present it.
In an effort to enhance the understanding of material
science concepts, McGraw-Hill publishers worked with
the department to create an ancillary CD-ROM called
Materials in Focus to accompany one of its material
science texts. The CD-ROM was designed to provide
interactive multimedia components that would enable
students to better understand minute details and
interactions on which the discipline focuses. Using
QTVR technology, the CD-ROM provides the ability to
navigate an NaCl molecule (see Figure 3), explore a
diamond crystal, examine a zinc-blende crystal, as well as
a wealth of other concepts.

Figure 4. QTVR clips allow students to dynamically
interact with compound structures giving them a
better understanding of relationships and structures.

Purdue University’s Virtual Visit
In the summer of 1998, the department was charged
with creating an online resource for students, faculty, and
visitors on Purdue’s West Lafayette campus. The goal
was to create an interactive Web site that would allow the
user to view the campus, examine its buildings, and

Figure 3. Navigation of an NaCl molecule.
In most instances the Materials in Focus is the first
exposure that students have had with QTVR and VR
technology. Using the video clips, students are able to
build a cognitive model of the content. Students are able
to not only visualize a structure, but also manipulate it
and view it from a variety of locations. Relationships
between particles, as well as an overall understanding of

Figure 5. The Purdue University Virtual Visit
provides a visit to campus via the WWW.
search for specific buildings. Additionally, the site was to
provide interesting facts, directions, and other bits of
information about the campus.

The final site, The Purdue University Virtual Visit,
contains a wealth of textural and graphical information
that allows almost anyone to browse the West Lafayette
campus via the WWW. Figure 5 shows the interface for
the Virtual Visit, which can be found at http://
www.tech.purdue.edu/resources/map/.
One of the unique features of the Virtual Visit is the
use of photo-based QTVR video clips. Throughout the
map, the user can click on a VR location that opens a
pop-up window where the user is presented with a QTVR
clip from the chosen location, as shown in Figure 6. Both
external and internal VR clips are provided, including
those from the football, basketball and indoors athletic
facilities.
Response from the Virtual Tour has exceeded input
from any other project. Respondents have indicated that
the site is one of the most unique they have found on the
Internet. Plans for the site include virtual tours of
buildings and special laboratories on campus as well as
use as a stand-alone kiosk across campus that displays the
Virtual Visit for those on site.

effort and research needs to be done in this area,
particularly since the technology is now readily available
for the desktop computer.

Figure 6. The QTVR clips provide a view of the actual
campus.

References

Implications for Visualization Research
In addition to the applied projects, the department is
also beginning to use QTVR clips as a basis for research
on visualization. One proposed use includes the study of
dynamic field dependence and field independence
learning styles on visualization ability and improvement.
By creating video clips that simulate static viewer
and static object modes of manipulation, as shown in
Figure 7, studies could be performed on users to see
which mode of manipulation correlates to their mode of
learning, if a correlation exists at all. Nonetheless, much

Figure 7. QTVR movies that simulate static viewer
and static object modes of manipulation may be used
in visualization research.

Conclusions
Although research results are still being gathered, at
this point in the project QTVR appears to increase learner
comprehension and understanding of complex
environments and objects. Additionally motivation and
learner interest increase using realistic, navigable VR
environments. The low-cost of creation and playback, as
well as the broad installed user base of QuickTime,
makes video-based QTVR technology a reasonable
choice for education and training materials.
Most importantly, video-based VR technologies are
well suited where photo-realism is vital and imperative.
Additionally, where data rate and bandwidth are a
concern, video-based VR technologies, such as QTVR,
provide an efficient and effective means of delivery via
CD-ROM or the World Wide Web.

[1] Bertoline, G. (1988). The implications of cognitive
neuroscience research on spatial abilities and graphics
instruction. Proceedings ICEGDG, 1, Vienna, 28-34.
[2] Lord, T. (1985). Enhancing the visuo-spatial aptitude of
students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 22, 5,
pp. 395-405.
[3] Talley, L. (1973). The use of three-dimensional visualization
as a moderator in th ehigher cognitive learning of concepts
in college level chemistry. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 12, 41-43.
[4] Maccoby, E. & Jacklin, C. (1974). The Psychology of Sex
Differences. The Stanford Press.
[5] Small, M. & Morton, M. (1983). Spatial visualization
training improves performance in organic chemistry.
Journal of College Science Teaching, 12, 41-43.
[6] Gardner, H. (1984). Frames of mind. New York: Basic
Books.

[7] Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple intelligences: The theory in
practice. New York: Basic Books.
[8] Bertoline, G., Burton, T., & Wiley, S. (1992). Technical
Graphics as a catalyst for developing visual literacy within
general education. Visual Communications: Bridging
Across Cultures: Selected Readings from the 23rd Annual
International Visual Literacy Association Annual
Conference, pp. 243-257.
[9] Wiebe, E. (1993). Visualization of three-dimensional form:
A discussion of theoretical models of internal
representation. The Engineering Design Graphics Journal,
57, 1, 18-28.
[10] Mohler, J. (1997). A macro-organizer for AutoCAD
instruction. The Engineering Design Graphics Journal, 61,
1, 5-13.
[11] Gibson, J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[12] McCuistion, P. (1990). Static vs. dynamic visuals in
computer assisted instruction. ASEE Annual Conference
Proceedings, pp. 143-147.
[13] Miller, C. (1992). Enhancing visual literacy of engineering
students through the use of real and computer generated
models. Visual Communications: Bridging Across
Cultures: Selected Readings from the 23rd Annual
International Visual Literacy Association Annual
Conference, pp. 85-96.
[14] Bertoline, G.R., Miller, C.L., & Mohler, J.L. (1995). Using
multimedia tools in the presentation of engineering
graphics concepts. Proceedings of the American Society
for Engineering Education North Central Section Annual
Meeting (pp. 89-95).
[15] McLellan, H. (1998). Cognitive issues in virtual reality.
Journal of Visual Literacy, 18, 2, 175-199.
[16] Ross, W. 7 Aukstakalnis, S. (1993). Virtual reality:
Implications in engineering design graphics. The
Engineering Design Graphics Journal, 57, 2, 5-12.
[17] Thurman, R. A. & Mattoon, J. (1994). Virtual reality:
Toward fundamental improvements in simulation-based
training. Educational Technology, 34, 8, 56-64.
[18] Media Metrix (1998). Top Software Owned by Percent
Reach [On-line] http://www.mediametrix.com/
interact_mm.html.

