Case-based Analysis for Virtual Model Application in AEC industry
Ogata Seigo
Kumamoto University
2-39-1 Kurokami, Kumamoto 860-8555, Japan
TEL:096-342-3536,FAX:096-342-3507
E-Mail:980d9719@eng3.stud.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
Kobayashi Ichiro, Dr. of Eng.
Kumamoto University
2-39-1 Kurokami, Kumamoto 860-8555, Japan
E-Mail:ponts@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
Hoshino Yuji
Kumamoto University
2-39-1 Kurokami, Kumamoto 860-8555, Japan
E-Mail:hoshino@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
Fukuchi Yoshihiko, Ph.D
Konoike Construction Co., Ltd.
3-6-1 Kitakyuhoji-machi, Chuo-ku, Osaka 541-0057, Japan
TEL:06-244-3674,FAX:06-244-3632
E-Mail: yfukuchi@alum.mit.edu

Abstract

follows; (1) whether presentation of the VM is as

This paper introduces the efficient application of

efficient as the PMU in terms of its power of expression,

Virtual Reality (VR) technologies in the Architecture,

(2) whether digital information of the VM is useful to

Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry, where

discuss views, ideas and interests about the

conventional plastic models are mainly used, which is

construction project, (3) whether the VM is practical

called Physical Mock Up (PMU). An idea of Virtual

enough to use in the AEC industry. Pilot trials of the

Model (VM) is introduced in the paper.

VM in actual construction projects are illustrated in the

The VM consists of digital models added by

paper. Those are an on-going land readjustment project

digital information about the project, such as CAD

in Osaka and a large-scale soil borrowing project in

drawings, digital maps of periphery, scanned aerial

Wakayama, Japan.

photos, on-site digital pictures and documents.

Keyword:

The paper investigates three principal points as

Virtual

Model,

Presentation Use, Study Use

Physical

Mock

Up,

1. Introduction

together in the construction field are unsuitable on the
desk-top personal computers because the limitation of

Consensus making among clients, designers and

hardware and software application[3].

the local community is important for the construction

Therefore, the authors have been demonstrated

project. On the planning and designing stages, the

the possibility of an effective application of VR

designers presented their work to the clients or the local

technology assuming consensus and presentation in the

community by using PMU (Physical Mock Up) which

construction project[4], [5]. This paper believes that its

is the conventional plastic model. The presentation

necessary to give priority to easy understanding of the

through the PMU is the usual method of information.

construction project contents than only give three-

This paper introduces the VM (Virtual Model) as

dimensional reality to the model made by computer.

a tool to achieve consensus instead of the PMU. Herein,

The main condition is to reproduce the three-

the VM is defined as the three-dimensional model

dimensional model on the virtual space in a certain

attached the digital information about the construction

degree smoothly. The three-dimensional model should

project such as CAD drawings, digital maps of

be good enough to be freely and easily inspected for

periphery, scanned aerial photographs, on-site digital

the construction project participants.

photos and documents.

For this reason, the authors attached digital

In this paper, the authors investigate three

information such as CAD drawings, digital maps of

principal issues as follows; (1) the presentation of the

periphery, scanned aerial photos, on-site digital pictures

VM is as efficient as the PMU in terms of its power of

and documents about the construction project to the

expression, (2) the digital information of the VM is

VM. Integrating these digital information may provide

useful to exchange views, ideas and interests about the

easy understanding of the project outline and

construction project, (3) the VM is practical enough to

reproduces reality practically, even if it does not exactly

use in the AEC industry.

represent reality. The VM is made by VRT from
Superscape, a UK based software vender. A desk-top

2. Proposal of Virtual Model (VM)

personal computer used as hardware[6].
The goal is to provide the simple and efficient use

The VM introduced in this paper, is one of the

of the VR technology in the construction field.

functional roles of Virtual Reality (VR) technology.

Synthesizing three-dimensional model through digital

Because VR technology can not exactly reproduce

information this paper proposes a VR easily to inspect

reality, it tries to practically reproduce it. The most

and to understand the contents of the construction

important criteria in VR technology is the ability to

project.

simulate reality sensibly and accurately. The three basic
characteristics involved in VR technology are[1], [2]:

3. Preparation and the advantage of
Virtual Model (VM)

(1) PRESENCE: to exist in the virtual space,
(2) INTERACTION: to share communication between
the user and the computer,
(3) AUTONOMY: to own originality and autonomy in
virtual space.

In the past, Physical Mock Up (PMU) were used
as a tool for consensus making procedures among
construction project members. The VM is confirmed as
a practical tool to provide the information about the
construction project. The differences can be compared

However, the utilization of these characteristics

in the VM (Figure 1) and the PMU (Figure 2) are

Figure 1. The PMU

Figure 2. The VM

Figure 4. Integration of Document

Figure 3. Integration of Map

Figure 5. The result of Integration

produced. The VM reproduces exactly the PMU in the

represents

virtual space. The VM created three-dimensionally by

construction project. Moreover, the VM have the

computer presents four main characteristics as follows;

ability to provide easy understanding information. This

the

concrete

information

about

the

section illustrated two example as follows;

(1) Interactive movement
(a) Example 1: Maps (Figure 3)
The VM can interactively moved by using the

To integrate information about mapping on the

interactive function of the VR technology, setting up

outskirts of the construction project zone to the project

different viewpoints in the virtual space. The User can

participants, VM provide general information such as

freely move and change the viewpoint in the VM space

relationship of geography, methods of traffic, map

anytime and use it like a video. Another, the VM

draw scale and so on. Also, one model is arranged the

provide flexibility to visualize the model on a large or

landmarks of the mountain periphery using the map as

small scale in conditions that a naked eye could not

a base. Thus, the user are able to look at the mountain

observed in the usual PMU. The VM provides many

through a viewpoint from inside of the park by

viewpoints requested from the users that are hard to be

interactive movement.

observed from the inside of the PMU. Therefore, the
user can observe in detail at the whole construction
project through the VM space.

(b) Example 2: Documents (Figure 4)
The three-dimensional models in the VM space
which are explained by documents, are understood by

(2) Integration with digital data

viewing explanation. The Figure 4 illustrates how the
VM recognizes the simple triangular cone object is “Mt.

The three-dimensional models in the VM space

Kinpo”, for example. Moreover, it is easy to

can be attached at the digital information such as CAD

communicate and unify of consensus among the

drawings, digital maps of periphery, scanned aerial

participants

photographs, on-site digital photos and documents. VM

explanation documents in the VM space are viewed

on

the

construction

project.

The

Figure 6. Replacement of the models

Figure 7. Attachment of textures

anywhere.
Figure 5 illustrates the results of all the digital
information collected and integrated. In this way, the

Figure 8. Use on WWW

compare several optional plans using replacement
methods of the three-dimensional models. The VM
established the library of these structure models.

VM was taken the periphery information (aerial
photographs, site photographs, maps) and used as a

(b) Attachment of textures

extent visual space. So far, its proved that the

The three-dimensional models in the VM can

traditional PMU is difficult to visualize. In the other

attached textures such as photos, pictures and so on.

hand the VM is very clear to visualize and help

Attachment of textures give more reality to the object

participants of the project to understand the outline of

models (figure 7, for example).

the construction process. The VM allowed designers
and engineers to view the entire site in detail and to

(c) Turned on/off of the three-dimensional models

simulate construction activities according to proposed

The three-dimensional models, which are

construction plans. The VM have effective and

controlled by script, can be turned on / off with a

practical digital information uses in the construction

mouse click in the VM space.

field than the conventional models and drawings.
The control by script gave reality to the VM

(3) Control by script

space. Although the VM have enough reality to

The three-dimensional structural models in the

provide easily understanding of the construction project.

VM space can be easily turned on and off, moved or

The VM which has surplus reality prevented creation

erased. The models in the VM space are easily moved

of the user from entertaining. The optimum method of

and erased compared to the PMU. Also, in the VM the

information presentation is the presentation by using

shape and color of the objects can be changed, so the

the VM which has both proper reality and interactive

user can examine the landscape of the area and

movement.

compare the plans of arrangement before and after
construction status.
(a) Replacement of the structure models

(4) Use on the World Wide Web (WWW)
The VRT data can be downloaded and viewed

The VM can be exchanged the model for another

within the Internet browsers on the computer. The VM

one. Figure 6 shows the sample of a simple model

data can be changed from normal file format (*.vrt)

object tree been replaced by the detail model one. Also,

into archive file format (*.svr) The file size comes to

the structure models can be added or updated without

one-fifth of the original one. The user can download

erase existing structures. The user can examine and

the plug-in software (Superscape Viscape 5.0) from the

Superscape Web Site[7]. Figure 8 shows the example of
the VM used on the WWW. The VM is shared and
viewed by unspecified people. With the maturation of
information and communication technologies the
concept that distributed VM facilities are delivered
over the Internet. For Collaborative work, VM provides
the possibility for several users to participate in the
same project.

Figure 9. Readjustment Project

4. Case studies
4.1. Readjustment Project[8], [9]
4.1.1. Overview
A major US-based recreational facility is being
constructed in the middle of a heavily industrialized

Figure 10. Soil Borrowing Project

bay area in Osaka. This project is the division of an
area which is about 156.2ha. The estimated completion
is from August 1995 to March 2002, and its cost is
about 640 million dollars.

4.2. A Large-Scale Soil Borrowing Project[10]

It is the main concern for clients and developers
of the park itself and the land readjustment project in

4.2.1. Overview

the vicinity whether the scenery from or around the

Because construction process in fact is a large

park is pleasantly match to the actual environment. The

scale and great quantity of area is involved, it seemed

project is in the phase of the preparation of land and the

to be impossible to plan and examine carefully by

design-build contracts of the park have been ordered.

using two-dimensional drawings or PMU. The VM
allowed designers and engineers to view the entire

4.1.2 Results of Application
Konoike Construction Co., Ltd. took the
presentation to the clients of the industrial park and to

construction site surroundings in detail, and to
construct temporary construction facilities according to
proposed plan.

the 19 enterprises which have their factories or real
estates around the construction site (figure 9, for

4.2.2. The VM for Construction Project

example). As a result of the presentation, the authors

The VM was chosen for the project (figure 10).

got several answers. From the list of activities for

Entire landscape of the area consists of maps, aerial

marketing by the VM, the principal advantages by

photographs, and three-dimensional objects such as the

using it are illustrated as follows; (1) high appraisal of

soil borrowing site. The overall goal is the VM that

using at PC level (9 enterprises), (2) there is value of

provides relevant people with the vision of suggested

investigation/they want to use it (6 enterprises), (3)

new facilities in the context of the already existing

easy to understand/interest (8 enterprises). In these, it is

environment while they are freely moving about in the

said that the VM is very efficiency for the use of the

scene and can turn them on and off at any given time.

presentation of construction project in designing stage.

4.3. Discussion

USA, Vol.1, No.1, pp.127-132, 1992.

In those applications, the authors described that

[3] Kato Hiroshi et al, “The digital information technology

the method of information through the VM has two

implemented in Automobile industry”, JAMAGAZINE, JAMA,

forms of application. They are presentation and study.

Tokyo, Japan, Vol.31, pp.3-19, February, 1997, in Japanese.

Either presentation or study will depend on the exactly
purpose of use. Over Internet any person is able to

[4] Ogata, Seigou et al., ’’Smooth Consensus Making by using

exchange an opinion about the project. Therefore, they

Real Time Animation’’, Seibu Chapter Proc. of Annual Conference

can freely look at the entire landscape of the

of Civil Engineers, JSCE, Tokyo, Japan, pp.930-931, March, 1998,

construction project through the VM space. Also, the

in Japanese.

constructor can easily examine the project by using a
desk-top PC. As a result, any person can use VM

[5] Koboyashi, Ichiro et al., ‘’Application of VR as a tool to achieve

efficiently in accord of its purpose of application.

consensus on Construction Project’’, Proc. 52th Annual Conference
of Civil Engineers, JSCE, Tokyo, Japan, pp.88-89, 1997, in

5. Conclusion
This paper has described the utility value of VM

Japanese.

[6] Seigou Ogata et al, ’’Application of Virtual Model to

as a tool to achieve consensus instead of using PMU

Achieve Consensus for Construction Project’’, First

and usual drawings. As a result, it confirm that VM is

International Conference on New Information Technologies

efficiently used by providing facilities of information in

for Decision Making in Civil Engineering Vol.2, Montreal,

the point of helping to understand the outline of a

Canada, pp.1217-1226, 1998.

construction project, there is more value than the
conventional models and drawings. Further, for the

[7] Superscape Web Site: http://www.superscape.com

good of the construction participants it is very suitable
to discuss about the construction project. In other

[8] Fukuchi, Yoshihiko et al., ’’CG Animation for Collaborative

words, it is said that the VM is necessary to achieve

Integrated Communications for Construction Management’’,

consensus. And, the VM will be able to cope with the

Journal of Symposium on Civil Engineering Information

accountability on the public. The authors are personally

Processing System, JSCE, Tokyo, Japan, pp.149-156, October,

thinking of going to propose a more effective way of

1997, in Japanese.

VM application in the future researches.
[9] Ogata Seigo et al., ’’Application of Virtual Model to

Acknowledgement

Achieve Consensus for Construction Project’’, Journal of
Symposium on Civil Engineering Information Processing System,

This research was supported by the Grant-in-

JSCE, Tokyo, Japan, pp.88-95, October, 1998, in Japanese.

Aid for Scientific Research (c) by the Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Government of

[10] Seigou Ogata et al, “CONSENSUS MAKING WITH

Japan, under Grant No.09650591.

VIRTUAL MODEL FOR CONSTRUCTION PROJECT”,
THE EIGHTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON

References

ARTIFICIAL REALITY AND TELE-EXISTENCE, VRSJ,

[1] Hirose Michitaka,, ‘’VIRTUAL REALITY’’ , OHMUSYA,

Tokyo, Japan, pp188-195, 1998, 12.

Japan, 1995, in Japanese.
[2] Zeltzer D, ‘’Autonomy, Interaction and Presence’’ ,PRESENSE,

