Trends in information visualisation in construction
Ghassan Aouad. BSc, MSc, PhD.
Research Centre for the Built and Human Environment
University of Salford
e-mail g.aouad@surveying.salford.ac.uk

Abstract
It is widely recognised that construction is an
information intensive and complex industry.
Traditional computational techniques have failed
our industry because of the shear number of
information interfaces and complex relationships.
Modern visual technologies can resolve many of
the aforementioned problems by providing
construction professionals with 3 dimensional
information interfaces that allow them to use the
visual model (3D, VR, etc) as the medium for
communication, interaction, and integration.
This paper looks at trends and predictions within
the construction sector for technologies such as
visualisation through CAD and VR. It then presents
an improved model for information interfacing
through VR capabilities. The information interface
model is a web-based one developed to provide
opportunities for many construction professionals
across the supply chain using open technologies
such as the Internet. This paper will demonstrate
that information visualisation is of importance and
can be used by every participant within the
construction sector including clients, contractors,
cost estimators, project planners, and others.
Finally, this paper will conclude with a series of
screen snap shots resulting from state of the art
research on information visualisation and
interfaces being conducted at the University of
Salford in the UK. Salford is bringing together
visualisation, object oriented and web technologies
to solve the problems associated with construction
information integration and communication. This
paper will provide an overview of this research

which will help many interested parties understand
how these technologies can work together.
Keywords: Virtual Reality, Trends, VRML, User
Interface,
Visualisation,
Project
Databases,
construction.

1. Introduction
Recent research into learning styles demonstrate
that the need for an imagery/visual type of
interface can no longer be ignored. Research has
shown that some people tend to learn in a visual,
preferably 3D environment. It is therefore crucial to
consider information visualisation in construction,
at least from a learning perspective. Research at
Salford
demonstrated
that
construction
professionals prefer 3D/VR types of models for user
interface to traditional records/instances in
databases. This paper demonstrates how the
web/VRML and object technologies can work
together to provide good information interfaces in
construction. Technologies are now available which
can be used to this end. The Internet and its
facilities should be exploited for the benefits of
better management and retrieval of construction
information. The VRML (Virtual Reality Modelling
Language) which is a web-based standard will be
explored as a means of remotely interrogating
information stored within an integrated database.
This paper aims
visualisation in
technologies. It
examples of how
direction.

to show trends in information
construction using CAD/VR
also includes some practical
the industry is moving in that

2. Previous work
Figure 2 Trends in CAD research in construction
The benefits of using VR as the technology for
visualisation and interactions have been highlighted
by many researchers in the construction sector [1, 2,
4, 10, 13, 15]. Some useful web sites are included
in the references [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Most of these
references address the issue of information
visualisation and recommend VR/3D as the
medium for visualisation and interfacing.

Figure 2 shows that CAD has been an active
research area in the last 10 years. This is attributed
to the fact that research into integrated systems is
centered around the use of a CAD model. The last
few years have seen a sift towards 3D type of
research.

4. The need for a VR interface
3. Trends in Visualisation
Research at Salford has shown that the use of VR
and CAD for visualisation and interfacing purposes
is on an upward trend. UK funded projects in this
area have increased in the last few years. The data
was collected from various sources in the UK. It is
evident that CAD and VR research goes hand in
hand as they are to a large extent inter-related.
Figures 1 and 2 show trends in VR and CAD
respectively.

12
Nb of
projects
9

6

3

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Research undertaken at the University of
Salford has shown how VR can be used as an
interface to a complex system. The system is called
“OSCON”. (Open Systems for CONstruction). The
system was developed using a VRML (Virtual
Reality Modelling Language) interface to an
integrated object oriented database, which supports
the design, planning and estimating of buildings.
The database uses the Object Store software, from
which the information can be retrieved and stored.
The user can interact with a Virtual Reality (VR)
model without having to understand the
background programming of the system. The user
queries the database using the VR model to obtain
information on elements of a proposed design of a
building. Information available to the user includes
texture, cost and time of elements within the
building. As VRML is a World-Wide-Web (WWW)
programming standard the information can be
passed to other construction professionals relatively
easily using the Internet. Figure3 below is a
diagram showing the architecture of the system.

1997

Trends in VR

Figure 1 Trends in VR research in construction
Figure 1 shows that research into VR in
construction started to pick up since 1992. Most of
this research is still at the experimental phase.

12

10

Figure 3 The architecture of the OSCON system

Nb
of projects
8

The model has been implemented and a graphical
representation is shown below. The 3D capabilities
provided by AutoCAD and VRML have been
crucial to the development of the integrated system.

6

4

1990

1991

1992

1993

Trends in CAD

1994

1995

1996

1997

AutoCAD has been used to displaay 3D information
of the intended design. All design parameter are
stored in the database, but attched to objects shown
in the CAD system. The user can manipulate design
information using the interface provided within
AutoCAD. However, VRML has been used as a sole
interface. The user can display information in this
environment without being able to change any of
the parameters. This has been a requirement of the
system in order to provide better control. The
applications shown in Fifure 3 are distributed while
conforming to the same data model. The use of
client-server technology has enabled this to be
implemented with a great suceess.

Figure 4 The integrated environment with VR as
an interface.

5. A scenario for a visual distributed
construction environment
The visualisation and interfacing capabilities of
the system are provided by AutoCAD and VRML as
shown in Figure 4. The user is provided with a suite
of integrated applications which support the design
and time and cost planning of buildings. The
AutoCAD design interface is used to generate the
design layout of the building. The user interacts
with AutoCAD as the graphical display
environment. In reality, the design information is
instantiated in the integrated object oriented
database and displayed in AutoCAD. The design
information is then used in generating quantities
which are used by the time and cost planning
prototype software. The VRML application is used
to show the building in 3D and to retrieve
information about specific objects in terms of cost,
time, etc. The parameters of design objects could be
changed in the object oriented database and the
implications on cost and time are displayed within
the VRML environment. This is one example of
how design can be changed in the database by
modifying its specifications and VR is used as the
medium to show the such implications. For a better
description of the numerous functions supported by
the OSCON database, the reader is referred to
Aouad et al [3].
This direct interaction with a VR environment has
many advantages over the use of a CAD package.
In traditional CAD systems, the design is relatively
static which makes changes costly and time
consuming as new images are re-generated from
sequences of fixed frames [11]. In a VR
environment, changes are handled efficiently by the
technology. The ultimate benefit is the ability to
create walkthroughs which can facilitate
collaboration between clients, designers, contractors
and suppliers. This is the main objective of the
OSCON database and it is strongly believed that
VR is the medium for communication and
convergence. This approach is ideal for creating
virtual organisations that communicate via an
integrated database. This will allow companies to
use their legacy applications, but the data shared
between them is stored in the database to provide
integrity and consistency. The interface is provided
by VR to allow for 3D visual representation of data.
This is a novel approach that will be adopted by

innovative organisations striving for efficient ways
of managing and storing data [15].

Figure 5 shows how companies can work together
in a distributed environment while relying on CAD
and VR capabilities to provide for better
visualisation of construction information.

Visualisaion

Company A
Client
CAD

Company B
Client
Planning

Data Transfer
Using Internet

Video conferencing, e-mail
Company C
Client
Estimating

Central
Server

prototype which will be used as an interface for a
project integrated database (OSCON). This
prototype is a web-based application which can be
run from any web site. This will allow for
construction
information
to
be
readily
communicated between head offices and
construction sites and any other locations and
provide better visualisation and interfacing. This
will ensure that information is communicated in a
much better format with a lot more user-friendly
visualisation capabilities. This paper has
demonstrated that a VRML can be used as an
interface to a complex object oriented database.
This interface has more navigation capabilities. The
user will ultimately find it simpler to navigate in a
VR environment rather than browsing through
thousands of records in a crude database
environment.

Company E
Client
FM

8. References
VRML
Client
Visualisation &
Interfacing

Figure 5 The Virtual Organisation
6. Industry involvement
The work presented here is being exploited by
some construction firms which can help them
through an experimentation phase. The VRML
prototype has been demonstrated to major
construction firms in the UK (ten companies). The
overall feedback from the demonstrations was
promising and encouraging. The users have
indicated their favouritism for VR as an interface.
The visualisation capabilities provided by the
system has been a major driver for the
aforementioned companies who started the
experimentation phase. This 3D-based visual
interfacing is promising as research in the learning
area has shown that a learning style based on visual
capabilities will be ideal for many companies in the
construction sector.

7. Conclusions
This paper presented trends and capabilities
within the are of information visualisation in
construction. The tend is upwards and a lot of
companies will be investing in these promising
technologies. This paper also presented a VRML

1. Alshawi, M & Faraj, I. Integrating CAD and VR
in construction. Proceedings of the Information
Technology Awareness Workshop. January 1995,
University of Salford.
2. Ames, A et al. The VRML source book, John
Wiley and sons, 1996.
3. Marir.F, Aouad.G, Cooper. G. OSCONCAD: a
model based CAD system integrated with
computer-related construction applications, ITcon
the electronic journal,1998, http://itcon.org
4. Griffin, M. Applications of VR in architecture
and design. Proceedings of the Information
Technology Awareness Workshop. January 1995,
University of Salford.
5.http://www.construct.rdg.ac.uk/ITProjects/proje12
3.htm(Ashworth: linking Kappa, AutoCAd and
WTK)
6.http://www.strath.ac.uk/Departments/CivEng/vcsr
g.html (Retik visual scheduling)
7.http://www.construct.rdg.ac.uk/ITsearch/Projects/
project12.html(James Powell: visualisation)
8.http://wquoll.maneng.nott.ac.uk/Research/virart/i
ndustry/maintran.html(Nottingham,maintenance
training: VIRART)
9.http://wquoll.maneng.nott.ac.uk/Research/virart/i
ndustry/rp.html(Nottingham,Rapid
prototyping:
VIRART)
10. Hubbold, R and Stone, R. Virtual reality as a
design tool in Rolls Royce. Proceedings of the

Information Technology Awareness Workshop.
January 1995, University of Salford.
11. Larijani, L.C. The virtual reality primer.
McGraw-Hill, USA, 1994.
12. Lorch, R. Animation in communication.
Proceedings of the Information Technology
Awareness Workshop. January 1995, University of
Salford.
13. Penn, A et al. Intelligent architecture: rapid
prototyping for architecture and planning.

Proceedings of the Information Technology
Awareness Workshop. January 1995, University of
Salford.
14. Retik, A & Hay, R. Visual simulation using VR.
Arcom 10th conference, Vol 12, 1994. pp 537-546.
15. Whyte, J, Bouchlagem D & Thorpe, T (1998).
The Promise and Problems of Implementing Virtual
Reality in Construction Prcatice. Proceedings, CIB
W78, Sweden, 1998.

