Visualization and Information: A Building Design Perspective
Jennifer Whyte, Dino Bouchlaghem, Tony Thorpe
Department of Civil and Building Engineering
Loughborough University, UK
J.K.Whyte@lboro.ac.uk
Abstract
Virtual reality (VR) packages offer good visualization
capabilities but inadequate facilities for either internal
data management or data exchange with other packages.
The potential usefulness of VR packages for industrial
and business applications is limited by their lack of
support for the manipulation of specialist information.
Their generic nature cannot retain the complex semantics
and syntax of industrial information. Within the iterative
process of building design and visualization, support is
required for construction industry data, which is ordered
in a complex and domain specific manner. Improved
transfer of data from specialist building design tools to
virtual reality has been investigated in previous research,
but in this paper it is argued that data transfer is not
enough. Virtual reality techniques need to become
available within the specialist buildings design tools and
alter the interface to such applications.

data exchange with other packages [2]. The potential
usefulness of VR packages for industrial and business
applications is limited by their incapacity to support
manipulation of specialist information. Within building
design tools, construction industry data is ordered in a
complex and domain specific manner.
Support is
required for this information in VR, but the generic nature
of VR packages cannot retain the complex semantics and
syntax of such industrial information. The utility of VR
for consensus building between different parties within
the iterative process of building design and visualization
cannot be realised without adequate information
management.
In this paper the particular benefits of virtual reality
in terms of building visualization and the challenges of
information management for building design are
considered. The generic nature of virtual reality packages
is contrasted with the highly specialised nature of building
design packages.

1. Introduction

2. Visualization Capabilities

In design applications visualization is not an end in
itself. The process of design and visualization should be
iterative, with changes made as a result of insights gained
through visualization propagated into the next version of
the design. The iterative nature of this process requires
adequate software support and thought processes should
not be interrupted by a requirement to translate the design
concepts into software terms for visualization [1].
The design of the urban environment involves many
interested parties. These parties, who start with different
understandings, include professionals such as engineers,
architects, and planners and non-specialists such as clients
and local residents. Collaborative building design requires
a shared understanding to be reached between all of the
interested parties.
Virtual reality packages offer good visualization
capabilities that can facilitate shared understanding across
interdisciplinary groups. However they have inadequate
facilities for both internal information management and

2.1 How is Virtual Reality Different?
Virtual reality models are interactive 3D models that
can be experienced in real-time1. The term virtual reality
is similar to, and sometimes used synonymously with
visual simulation, digital mock-up, virtual prototyping,
walk/flythrough, and 4D CAD.
The work undertaken by the authors of this paper
concerns the use of PC-based virtual reality models by
building designers. High-end immersive virtual reality
systems with high visual fidelity and hardware peripherals
for haptic and audio feedback are not considered
necessary for virtual reality as defined above. Rather it is
1

Optimal real-time interaction is not always attainable. Optimal
interaction requires a frame rate of 60 frames a second combined with a
system latency, in responding to user’s actions, of 50 milliseconds. A
minimum requirement for interaction is described as 10 frames per
second with a latency, or control lag, of 0.1 seconds [3].

made and therefore the only choices are the complete
rejection or acceptance of the modelled proposal [4]. VR
is particularly useful for interdisciplinary collaboration as
it provides both a degree of realism that allows easy
comprehension and the possibility of interaction.

3. Information Management
3.1 Within Building Design Tools
Fig. 1. A VR model offers dynamic interaction.

the interactive and real-time (or near real-time) nature of
virtual reality models that makes them of particular
interest and distinguishes their use from that of other
visualization techniques.
Other visualization techniques, such as rendered
images and animations of architectural models can be
produced from within computer aided design (CAD) and
modelling packages but do not provide real-time
interaction. These images and animations show the
context, materials and shadows of the proposed building
and can be aesthetically so convincing as to be termed
photo-realistic. They have the advantage that they are
easily understood by both different kinds of building
professionals and non-professionals. Produced using
techniques like ray tracing, radiosity, parametric
animation, and panoramas, they can take a long time to
render and are static or predefined.
Like the images and animations described above,
virtual reality offers the advantage of easy comprehension
by both different kinds of building professionals and by
non-professionals. The level of visual realism in desktop
VR models is not as high as that attainable in static
images or predefined animations and panoramas, as
techniques such as radiosity rendering are too
computationally intensive to be undertaken in real-time.
VR is different from other visualization techniques in that
it offers the capacity to dynamically interact with a
realistic model of a building in a manner that is not
predetermined. The dynamic nature of VR models allows
the comprehension of spatial aspects of the proposed
building development that are important in the
understanding of architectural intent. Realism may be
more than graphical and real world behaviours may be
simulated leading to applications of VR for the detection
of collisions, and the simulation of climatic conditions.
The authors see VR models as particularly valuable
for collaborative discussion of design. For this function it
has been found that when models are too highly
realistically detailed they intimidate users from changing
them or lead to the impression that all decisions have been

The most common computer-aided design (CAD)
tools used in the construction industry today have little inbuilt intelligence, and deal with graphical/mathematical
entities such as two-dimensional lines. Their interface has
been severely criticised as clumsy and un-user friendly [1]
requiring the user to translate the architectural concepts
into software terms.
Latest versions of popular CAD packages offer a
degree of abstraction from software concepts to higherlevel architectural entities. There are special customised
libraries of routines available as add-ons to the basic
packages to allow the automation of common activities
and increase the productivity of AEC (architecture,
engineering and construction) specialists such as the
housing designer designing timber frame buildings or the
civil engineer involved in road layout. Such CAD
packages contain large libraries of parametric building
parts, such as doors, windows, and structural components,
which are used to organise building assembly and
material information. These library components contain
2D and 3D representations of the building part that can be
substituted in the different viewpoints. Thus the user can
design in 2D using the library of components, and
automatically generate a 3D model, or design in 3D, and
extract plans, and sections.
The graphical user interface (GUI) in the latest
versions of CAD packages has also been refined and realtime pan and zoom facilities have been added to aid
navigation around the drawing.
These dynamic
navigation tools enhance the user’s ability to interact with
the software. Visualisation techniques such as fast ray
tracing, reflection, refraction, transparency, translucency,
radiosity, photomatching and shadow effects can be used
to produce more realistic images either in the package or
in modelling packages that import their native format.
It has been predicted that advanced building design
tools will become semantically richer [5]. It is possible
that such tools will be based on Industry Foundation
Classes (IFCs). These are a common set of intelligent
building design objects that have been developed by an
industry driven standardisation initiative concentrating on
building construction, the International Alliance for
Interoperability (IAI). These IFCs use inheritance as a

means of reusing and elaborating data and methods within
the different classes. The intelligent building design
objects represent architectural components and
encapsulate information about their attributes and the
methods needed for their manipulation. However for such
objects to be used in VR, they must also encapsulate
information about their behaviours, for example a
representation of a door must contain information, not just
of what material it is made of and what it is fixed to but
also of how it opens.

3.2 Within VR tools
VR has been developed out of advanced simulations
and computer graphics techniques and even the more
high-level user-friendly packages, which do not require
extensive programming, use concepts that are unfamiliar
to the building designer. The visualization is not static,
but is dynamic and for large data sets generating dynamic
images requires considerable computational effort. With
limited computer power, there is a trade off between the
amount of information processed and the speed of
navigation. Many features of information management
within VR packages are concerned with optimising the
model to achieve real-time navigation. This is achieved
by reducing the information to be processed and hence the
computational effort required during each simulation
loop. Model optimisation is not satisfactorily dealt with
entirely automatically by the software and, instead of
leaving the user to concentrate on their domain-specific
task, requires of the user some consideration of
computing techniques. Thus instead of dealing with
purely architectural entities, the building designer using a
VR package finds themself dealing with lower-level
concepts such as polygons, nodes, bounding boxes, and
scene-graphs.
Root
Node

6.

1.
LOD
Node

2.
Geometry
Node 1

3.

7.

Light
Node

4.

5.

Geometry
Node 2

8.

9.

12.

13.

Group
Node

14.

Geometry
Node 3

10.
11.
Fog
Node

Fig. 2. An Acyclic Scene Graph, showing the scene
graph traversal order.

In a VR model, information is typically organised
hierarchically in an acyclic scene graph. The scene graph
is structured in a tree-like manner, with nodes attached
together from top to bottom and the root node
representing the top point, as shown in Figure 1. Nodes
may include content such as geometries or lights. Nodes
inherit the translations and orientations of their parent
nodes and pass on their own translation and orientation to
their children nodes. The scene graph traversal order is
important, as this is the order in which the scene is
rendered. In VR packages such as WTK this is in a top to
bottom, left to right order [6]. Thus in Figure 1, the light
node will affect the geometry node 3, but not the nodes 1
and 2.
The scene graph is used to facilitate spatial culling.
The part of the model being viewed is determined and
geometry and effects are selectively loaded and rendered,
with unseen geometry and effects being culled to increase
performance.
Geometric simplification is also used to reduce
computational effort through the use of levels of detail
(LODs) and the use of texture mapped predefined or
primitive solids.
• Special switching nodes provide distant dependant
levels of detail (LODs), replacing complex geometry
with simpler geometry at a sufficient distance from
the viewpoint for the eye not to perceive the loss of
detail. This substitution of simpler geometry frees up
memory and system resources.
• Simple predefined objects, such as spheres, cubes and
cylinders, can be used together with texture maps to
simplify the amount of geometric data in a model.
Predefined geometries more efficient than custom
geometries. For example in the Virtual Reality
Modelling Language (VRML) a model built out of
primitive shapes will run significantly faster than one
built using the customised indexed face set
command.
Virtual reality technologies are developing and
becoming out-dated fast. The non-proprietary VR format
VRML was made an international standard for 3D
(VRML’97 - ISO/IEC DIS 14772-1) and formed a basic
generic VR functionality. However browsers for this
format are no longer supported and have become opensource. At present both VRML and the proprietary PCbased VR systems are based on Open GL or Direct 3D
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), however
technologies such as Java 3D and Fahrenheit might
become increasingly important.

Z

3.3 Data Transfer

Y

Y

Data transfer between CAD and VR is neither easy
nor reliable [7][8]. The transfer of data has normally been
unidirectional or “downstream” [2]. Data can be passed
from CAD to VR but the retrieval of data from the
visualization has not been successfully implemented.
Significant operator intervention and interpretation of the
available data can also be involved in the creation of a
suitable VR model from CAD data.
Many CAD and 3D modeling packages now export
to VRML and/or have native formats that can be imported
directly by VR packages. However commercial or in-built
translators often produce large or inaccurate VR models
due to the problems of translating the syntactic and
semantic structure of CAD data into VR. Specific
problems are encountered with 1) the use of optimised
geometries and instances, 2) the different scales and
alignments used in CAD and VR, and 3) the
determination of the orientation of polygons, or faces
within the VR world.
1) Commercial and in-built translators often do not
create data optimised for the VR world, and the
resultant simulations run unacceptably slowly.
Primative shapes are not used, for example the
conversion of simple shape such as a cube from 3D
Studio into VRML creates a form based on VRML’s
indexed face sets, which requires more computational
effort than the in-built primitive shape. Instances are
not recognised, so instead of the geometry for one
window being created and duplicated fifty times on a
uniform facade, the geometry is created fifty times,
greatly increasing the file size.
2) CAD packages use a world base co-ordinate system –
with X and Y describing the ground plane and Z
describing the height, but VR uses a differently
oriented co-ordinate system with X and Y describing
a vertical plane and Z describing depth as shown in
Figure 3. Translators between CAD and VR
packages use a transformation matrix to correctly
orientate the resultant geometry, but these are not
reliable. VR models imported into the same scene
from different sources often have to be scaled, for
example the CAD data relating to buildings may have
been based on a unit of 1mm, whilst the terrain data
may assume a unit size of 1m.

Z

X
The co-ordinate system in CAD

X
The co-ordinate system in VR

Fig 3. Different Co-ordinate systems in CAD and VR

3) The orientation of polygons is important in VR for
back face rejection. The front side of the polygon is
that for which the vertices are ordered counterclockwise. In CAD there is no necessity to create the
vertices of shapes in a particular order. Hence when
CAD files are translated into VR, the orientation of
the polygons is random, and unordered. The degree
of accuracy in VR is also not as great as in CAD
(Bourdakis, 1997) and hence two faces that are
within 0.6mm may be taken to be co-existing in the
same space when the model is translated into VR.
These problems lead to difficulty with the rendering.
Manually solving these problems or ‘tweaking’ VR
models leads to a decline in productivity. Better data
transfer from CAD to VR was advocated in previous
work by the authors, and three methods of facilitating the
rapid creation of virtual environments through managed
data transfer have been identified for use in different
circumstances [2]. These methods are the creation of a
library of parts, simple translation and the use of a central
database.

4. Generic VR tools
At present most virtual reality packages are generic
tools for the visualization of data within many different
application areas, from the interactive games and
entertainment market, to data visualization and industrial
applications in the engineering disciplines. This generic
nature of the VR tools leads to difficulties within highly
specialised application areas such as construction.

5. Research at Loughborough University
As part of ongoing research at Loughborough
University, VR models of housing developments have
been created in the commercially available generic VR
packages, Figures 1 & 4, using different VR technologies

Fig 4. VR Model assembled in a Generic VR Tool, using CAD housetype data, and site layout data

and modelling techniques [9]. These VR models have
been demonstrated to construction professionals involved
in housebuilding and feedback has been gained
concerning the potential use of such models.
From this work, the importance of improving
visualisation without dramatically reducing productivity
has been noted. The professionals interviewed were
concerned about the time consuming nature of the
modelling process.
The unfamiliar nature of the graphical user interface
of the VR package, the lack of internal support for
construction data, and the lack of sophisticated tools for
model creation and modification have been identified as
problems.
1) The interfaces to VR tools are unfamiliar to the
building designer and are not customised to automate
tasks that are frequently carried out by them. This leads to
a reduction in user productivity, as the building designer
spends time learning to interact with the software through
an unfamiliar interface and dealing with unfamiliar
software concepts.
2) There is a lack of internal support for the
complex and domain specific manner in which
construction industry data is ordered. There is no internal
support for architectural entities and their attributes within
the VR package. Construction data in the VR package is
represented by geometries and can be interacted with only
in terms of these geometries and their faces, rather than as
intelligent architectural components. As discussed in the
previous section, this translation of data from CAD leads
to the re-entering, translating and re-ordering of
construction industry data to suite the VR package and
this is a non- value added activity for a company,
reducing user productivity and limiting the commercial
potential of VR.
3) The tools provided for model creation and
modification in VR packages are not as sophisticated as
those provided in CAD packages as the production of
construction and architectural models has not been the

main objective of the programmers who have developed
VR packages. At present building designers tend to
design in CAD packages and then translate the file into .
VR for visualisation. Changes made in the VR model
cannot be unproblematically propagated back into the
CAD model.
Generic virtual reality packages do not allow the
integration of modelling and visualization nor do they
have the domain specific functionality that the industry or
business user requires.

6. Construction Industry Requirements
They require VR tools that can provide the benefits
of advanced visualisation, without reducing productivity.
Features identified during this research, which are
required of VR tools for building design and
visualization, are:
1) A familiar interface – at present specialist skills are
required for operating VR software, building
professionals would like to interact with VR models
that use construction industry conventions and the
familiar metaphors (eg. drag and drop) used by
common windows software.
2) Internal support for construction industry data –
building professionals would like to move and place
architectural components rather than deal with
polygons, geometries, nodes etc.
3) Sophisticated tools for model creation and
modification - housebuilders are constantly
modifying designs. They would like to be able to
change design interactively in the VR environment.
At present VR packages do not have the sophisticated
tools for the selection and creation of architectural entities
that exist in CAD, and the process of designing in VR is
clumsy and time consuming

7. Lessons from other industries

Within process and manufacturing engineering the
need for specialist VR tools has been recognised [10]. In
these application areas vendors are beginning to provide
virtual reality packages containing sophisticated in-built
domain-specific design and information management
functions, or forming alliances with specialist CAD
providers. Products have been developed that use a
central database to provide the range of functionality that
is normally found in seperate CAD and VR packages. The
integration of CAD and VR functionality into one design
tool seems likely to continue as the VR company,
Division, has been sold to Parametric Technology
Corporation, makers of Pro/Engineer; a CAD package
specialised in the manufacturing industry [11].
By combining the information management
capabilities of CAD packages with the visualization
capabilities of VR, the next generation of building design
tool could be born. Virtual reality techniques can be used
to provide another view on the architectural model from
within the CAD package.

8. Conclusions
The requirements of construction industry users of
VR cannot be accommodated in generic VR packages. At
present the construction industry information and
information management facilities are in one package
whilst the visualization techniques are only available in
another package. Translation between the two packages
is unsatisfactory and changes made as a result of the
visualization in VR cannot be easily propagated back into
the design data held in CAD.
Support is needed for the complex semantics and
syntax of specialised construction industry information
during the visualization phase, as interdisciplinary groups
using VR for collaborative design need to interact with
architectural components rather than geometries and
faces.
For use in the iterative process of design and
construction, virtual reality techniques need to become
available within the specialist building design tools and
alter the interface to such applications. This has already
begun to happen in the process and manufacturing
industries.

9. Further Work
Work is currently focussed on the use of desktop VR
within the housebuilding industry. The industrial potential
of VR within this sector and the type of VR representation
that best facilitates collaborative design are being
investigated.

10. References
[1] S. Johnson, “What's in a representation, why do we care,
and what does it mean? Examining evidence from psychology”,
Automation in Construction, Vol. 8 No 1, 1998, pp 15 – 24.
[2] J. Whyte, N. Bouchlaghem and A. Thorpe, “The Promise
and Problems of Implementing Virtual Reality in Construction
Practice”, Proceedings of CIB W78, The life-cycle of
Construction IT innovations: technology transfer from research
to practice Stockholm, 3-5 June 1998.
[3] L.J. Rosenblum, and R.A. Cross, “The Challenge of Virtual
Reality”, in ed. Earnshaw, R., Vince, J., Jones, Huw.
Visualization & Modeling, Academic Press, 1997.
[4] J. Counsell, B. Phillips, “The Tower of London Computer
Models”, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV’97), London, England, 27-29
August 1997.
[5] C. Eastmann, “Future Development of Applications in
Architecture and Construction”, ISFAA-97 - Information
Sources
for
AEC
Applications.
Available
at
http://sage.alphawest.net.au/~ausstep/aec-libraries/w1reference/eastman.html, 1997.
[6] WorldToolKit Reference Manual, Release 8, Sense
8,California, 1998.
[7] V. Bourdakis, “The Future of VRML on Large Urban
Models”, Proceedings of VR-SIG’97, Brunel, 1 November 1997,
pp 55-61.
[8] M. Alshawi, “Integrating CAD and Virtual Reality in

Construction”, Conference on VR and Rapid Prototyping
in Engineering, EPSRC, Salford, 1995.
[9] J. Whyte, N. Bouchlaghem, and A. Thorpe, “Visualising
Residential Development using Desktop Virtual Reality”,
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV’98) London, 29-31 July 1998.
[10] D. Fanguy, Oral presentation at the UKVRForum meeting,
Cambridge, 8 March 1999.
[11] Parametric Technology Corp. “Parametric Technology
Corp. Completes Acquisition of Division Group plc”
http://www.ptc.com/
(Division -http://www.division.co.uk)

