Mirroring Medusa: Counterveillance in ShootingBack

Jieun Rhee
Department of Art Hisory, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Ave. Boston, MA 02215
jnrhee@bu.edu
Abstract
In our society, apparati of electronic surveillance
and satellite systems pervade almost every sector of our
public and private lives. Information concerning
individuals is controlled mostly by institutions, serving
bureaucratic or corporate interest. This paper examines
the possibilities of counter-surveillance in socio-cultural
practices through Steve Mann’s ShootingBack. In this
‘meta-documentary,’ Mann dares to shoot back at the
power of institutions and capital by recording the very
devices of surveillance (e.g., surveillance cameras) with
his tiny TV camera NetCam, which is hidden in his
eyeglasses and connected to his wearable computer.
This ‘shooting’ usually provokes quarrels with the
clerks or the security guards. NetCam transmits the
whole situation to share simultaneously with others who
have access to his website. Through this skirmish with
authority, we can examine the structure of omnipresent,
‘capillary’ power and grope for the possibilities for
counterveillance via World-Wide Web.

[I]t was Medusa’s gaze that was endowed
with the power of turning to stone all who
came within its purview [....] Perseus contrived
to steal this power for himself [....] This he
accomplished by means of a ruse: using his
shield as a mirror, he reflected the deadly
gaze back upon itself, whereupon Medusa
was immediately---or so the narrative
proposes---petrified. Turned against itself,
Medusa’s power turns out to be her
vulnerability, and Perseus’s vulnerability, his
strength.

(Craig Owens, “ The Medusa Effect, or, The
Specular Ruse” )
In the society in which we live, technology can no
longer be conceived as neutral. It is authority. The
optimism of global communication and open distribution
of information still sounds attractive, but information is
controlled by institutions serving mainly bureaucratic or
corporate interest. In our society, power is not centered
around the physical existence of a monarch or a
hierarchical structure of a court. Rather, it takes a
“capillary form of existence” which permeates every
sector of our public and private life [1]. Surveillance, in
this context, is a strategy of power which controls
society by observing the body of individuals. Imbricated
with the network of surveillance, such as apparati of
electronic surveillance and satellite systems, individuals
are subject to the new panopticon, the omniscient,
omnipresent god of advanced capitalism. In this
network, the powerful gaze of the new panopticon not
only regulates the possibility of violation of the norms
that authorities pose, but also infiltrate the norms into
individuals through the process of “internalization” [2].
In this paper, I would examine how individuals
counteract, via socio-cultural practices, to the
omnipresent surveillance, the vehicle of the “capillary”
yet gigantic power. Steve Mann’s ‘meta-documentary’
ShootingBack suggests several significant aspects of the
issue of surveillance and counterveillance.

On the Aegis of Minerva
Steve Mann, a media artist and a professor in
Electrical Engineering at the University of Toronto,
dares to shoot back at the immeasurable power of
institutions and capital by recording the very devices of
surveillance (e.g., surveillance cameras in a department
store) with his inventions which he aptly calls “rigs.” He

1

equips himself with a covert video recording system
concealed in his eyeglasses and with an ‘underwearable’
computer inside his pants (fig. 1 and 2). A small handset
device he carries controls every shooting process while
he is on the go. The pictures taken along the way are
directly transmitted to his World-Wide Web site via air
waves. Any person who accesses Mann’s webpages can
see what Mann sees in the first-person point of view.1
Steve Mann goes into stores such as Seven-Eleven or
WalMart and institutions where the photographing is
implicitly or explicitly prohibited. He carries his
NetCam and WearComp along with an outmoded
potable camcorder. This bulky camcorder functions as a
mere prop, while the real recording is actually being
done by the NetCam in his eyeglasses. In most cases,
security guards or the representatives of the institution
try to stop him taking pictures of their security devices
(usually the surveillance cameras). Interesting
conversations, and often quarrels, ensue between Steve
Mann and the employees when Mann persistently
questions the authorities behind the surveillance camera
who are presumably observing others while preventing
others from watching them. During these live debates,
Mann rests his hand-held camcorder, while the NetCam
captures the whole situation and transmits the pictures to
his website. This is Mann’s “meta-documentary — a
documentary about making a documentary about video
surveillance,” ShootingBack [3, 4].2
Mann interrupts corporate culture’s authority by
generating disturbance in its very locus of surveillance
with his wearable NetCam. Armed with advanced
technology, he holds up a mirror to the surveillant
authority by spotting and recording the very devices of
surveillance. The fact that we are being watched (in a
department store or other institution) has been already
naturalized as a part of our everyday lives. But the
acknowledgment of us being watched through Mann’s
website reveals this process as suppressive and violating.
Surveillance has become a more and more important
issue in terms of the tactics of power to increase the
efficiency of its reign over the individual constituents of
the society. According to Michel Foucault, the shift in
the embodiment of power from a monarch or a court to a
more subtle “capillary form of existence” brought an

1
It is interactive, of course. His wife can send a message to get some
food when she sees the local market through the picture he is
transmitting. The message appears on a tiny projection of a window
which functions as a screen on his darkglasses’s interior.
2
See also Mann, “ Smart Clothing: The Wearable Computer and
WearCam”, Personal Technologies (March 1997), and “Wearable
Computing as means for Personal Empowerment”, a keynote address
for The First International Conference on Wearable Computing,
ICWC-98 (May 12-13, 1998) Fairfax VA.

emphasis on the techniques of surveillance as an
effective means of ruling [1, 5]. Power found the system
of surveillance as a much more economic and safer way
of control than the previous public exhibition of
punishment, which had a lot of negative effects besides
its high costs. From Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon [6] to
Mark Poster’s “superpanopticon” [7], the technique and
rhetoric of surveillance have been extraordinarily
elaborated. As Shoshana Zuboff rightly acknowledges,
the subjects of surveillance often show “anticipatory
conformity” proving that the standards of ruling are
“internalized” in themselves [2, 8].
In this regard, critical discourses on surveillance have
surged in the 1980s and 1990s. Early in 1973, James
Rule worried about the nightmarish Orwellian society
imbricated with the network of surveillance [9]. Anthony
Giddens [10] and Gary Marx [11] delve into the Static
surveillance. Giddens acknowledges two major loci of
surveillance as bureaucratic administration and the
capitalist workplace; together they work as “the twin
process of surveillance” which reveal the historical
intertwining of “the capitalist labor contract with the
state monopoly of violence” [8, 10]. Marx’s analysis of
American undercover police is yet another insight of the
panoptic shift, which he indicates as “diffusing into the
society at large” [11]. On the other hand, Shoshana
Zuboff seeks the parallel of authority as “spiritual basis
of power” in the technology as “material basis of
power.” Here the core of the contemporary management
technique, she argues, is panopticism. According to
Zuboff, the omnipresent digital gaze of computerized
information systems replaces the authority of supervisor
and draws compliance from the subjects of the systems
who have been already “internalized” into the norms of
the systems by using them without much trouble [2]. Her
use of the term “internalization” echoes Foucaulian
“interiorisation” [1].3 He explains the function of power
as follows.
[...]power[...] is not that, which makes the
difference between those who exclusively
possess and retain it, and those who do not
have it and submit to it. [....] Power is
employed and exercised through a net-like
organization. And not only do individuals
circulate between its treads; they are always in
the position of simultaneously undergoing and
exercising this power. [...] In other words,

3
The basis of Zuboff’s assumption is the equal — or at least
seemingly equal — access to the information for both the
management and the workers. On the contrary, Foucault’s analysis on
“normalization” gives more subtle pictures of the scene.

2

individuals are the vehicles of power, not its
points
of
application.
(Foucault,
Power/Knowledge, 1980, 98)
According to his interpretation, power does not flow
only in one direction. The operation of power is not the
one from the center to the periphery or from the top to
the bottom. The individuals are not always passively
submissive to the norms of power, but they are in fact
the subjects who are practicing the norms in their
everyday lives. This is what particularly empowers
Foucaulian ‘capillary power.’ Since power is not
centralized but permeated in every sector, every
trajectory, and every field of life, its omnipresent
“micro-mechanisms” bolster power’s polymorphous
structure with more intact operation on the respective
bodies of individuals. And also, it is the beauty of this
“capillary power” that it treats the individual as the
bearer and practitioner of power via the process of
“interiorisation” [1]. “Interiorisation,” in Foucaulian
view of panopticism, is allotting dispersed power to the
individuals and making them participate in the power
operation in the surveillance network as a respective
“inspecting gaze.” Here the individuals can be the
overseers of each other; “each individual thus exercising
this surveillance over, and against,” oneself [1].
The power can flow both in centrifugal and
centripetal ways; the sums of individuals’ watching
consist
of
institutional
surveillance.
The
counterveillance that the remainder of this paper
discusses founds its discourse on these reciprocal ways
of power operation. If what we are dealing with is a
capillary power in a specific locus of our everyday lives,
individuals could possibly carry out their own
skirmishes with this pervasive yet substantial power.
Since the battle is fought on the capillary loci, the
strategies should be set up for skirmishes fought at the
individual level. In ShootingBack, Mann engages in this
everyday skirmish with corporate authority.
Mann legitimately calls his documenting performance
“reflectionism,” a term which he borrows from the
Situationist4 concept of detournement, which is “resituating ordinary everyday objects in a disorienting
4
Situationists are originated in a small band of avant-garde artists and
intellectuals who founded the magazine Situationaliste Internationale
in 1957. From early 1960s, the Situationists increasingly applied their
critique not only in culture but to all aspects of capitalist society. Guy
Debord, the author of Society of the Spectacle, emerged as one of the
most important Situationist theoreticians who influenced French
society during the 1968 student rebellion. For Situationists, to
transform the perception of the world is to change the structure of
society. By liberating themselves, people change power relations and
therefore transform society. See Guy Debord, Society of the Spectacle.
Detroit: Black & Red, 1983.

fashion in order to challenge our pre-conceived notions
and cultural biases” [3]. In ShootingBack, a hidden
camera installed in a pair of eyeglasses becomes a
weapon for disturbing the authorities’ surveillance
cameras. Mann defines the defense strategies of
authorities’ “video surveillance superhighway” as
follows.
1. Secrecy: Cameras are often hidden in whole or in
part. The security industry is itself also often not subject
to open debate or peer-review;
2. Rhetoric: “Public safety,” “loss prevention,” or “For
YOUR protection you are being videotaped;
3. Constancy: Department store clerks don’t follow you
around with camcorders; rather, video surveillance is
present in a “matter of fact” manner, as part of the
architecture’s prosthetic territory;
4. Appeal to a higher and unquestionable authority:
“I trust you and know you would never shoplift, but my
manager installed the cameras; or, “We trust you, but
our insurance company requires the cameras;”
5. Criminalization of the critic: “Why are you so
paranoid — you’re not trying to steal something are
you?” [3]
The strategies for individual counterveillance mirror
that of surveillance.
1. Secrecy: completely covert embodiments of the
WearComp/WearCam invention have been created, and
used in places where photography is strictly
prohibited[...]
2. Rhetoric: the rhetoric of personal safety is used to
mirror the rhetoric of public safety.
3. Constancy: the devices are wearable, rather than
carried, so that either they cannot be discerned by others,
or it cannot be determined whether they are in actual use
or not at any given time. The devices are part of any
prosthetic territory, e.g., clothing.
4. Appeal to a higher and unquestionable authority:
various performances, such as My Manager use the
principle of “subservient empowerment.”
5. Criminalization of the critic: inferences pertaining
to the possible criminal intent of those who question
personal safety devices are made, e.g., possible
violations of fire safety, such as fire exist being illegally
chained shut or exists blocked [3].
So the shiny shield of Minerva — the NetCam —
reflects the gaze of Medusa — the pervasive power of
authority — back on herself. If the authorities explain to
Mann that they are videotaping him for his own safety,
Mann, then, will kindly show them their own images

3

being transmitted live at his website, of course, for their
own safety. Medusa would be petrified. But is she?

WWW : “The Whole World is Watching?”
Steve Mann’s agenda in ShootingBack is to “resituate” the surveillance devices by integrating those
tools with the body of the individual, “who might
otherwise be completely powerless” before the daunting
force of authority/surveillance [3]. He arms the
individuals with the apparati of counter-surveillance, yet
another name of the device of surveillance. These
apparati function as ‘equalizers’ which suggest that
“shopkeepers and customers alike, police and ordinary
citizens alike, etc., must respect the possibility that they
could be caught on camera” [12]. He also contrives the
connection of these individuals via the World-Wide
Web. Connected together wirelessly, the groups of
individuals who wear the WearCams, according to
Mann, form a “personal safety network” -- what Mann
calls the SafetyNet “to reduce crime”[13]. But isn’t this
rhetoric reminding us of the very slogan of public
surveillance? Isn’t the fear of criminals the infrastructure
of static surveillance? [1].
As Foucault argues, each individual is watching
others, while simultaneously being watched by uncertain
others. “You have an apparatus of a total and circulating
mistrust, because there is no absolute point. The
perfected form of surveillance consists in a summation
of malveillance” [1]. This is what Zuboff defines as
“internalization of standard” [2]. Poster also
acknowledges the same problem of the individuals’
“self-constitution as subjects in the normalizing gaze”
[7]. Then, is power soliciting individuals by allotting
their share of the pleasure of observation for making the
individuals as effective enforcement of its pervasive
surveillance network?
As Clifford Shearing and Philip Stenning indicate,
the situation is less like Orwell’s nightmarish society
under Big Brother, but rather like Huxley’s Brave New
World, where the control of the society is consensual. So
the individuals in the society are “seduced into
conformity by the pleasures offered by the drug, ‘soma’
rather than coerced into compliance by threat of Big
Brother, just as people are toady seduced to conform by
the pleasure of consuming the goods that corporate
power has to offer” [14]. Information as commodities is
attached to both the individuals and power with an
umbilical cord of gold.
This problem of “internalization” or “interiorization”
has been discussed at the beginning of this paper. This is
a part of the “dialectics of control” that Giddens points
out; all strategies of control “call forth counter-strategies

on the part of subordinates” [10]. In this context, the
logic of counterveillance via surveillance relies on the
same problem-solving solution, the assumption that “if
technological
advancement
produces
perceived
problems, then some technological fix can be applied to
overcome it” [8]. But in reality, the previous debates on
the “personal safety,” or privacy issues are delimited in
those who are privileged to negotiate his or her own selfprotection [8].
Going back to Steve Mann’s ShootingBack,
questions emerge. Is his use of technology truly
subversive? Or is he inserting himself into this network
of surveillance as yet another authority? How much of
the information that he shows us is controlled by him?
As a Ph.D. in Media Art at MIT, and a professor in
Electrical Engineering at the University of Toronto,
working in the lab of that institution funded by some
gigantic multinational corporations, is Mann’s
technology ‘independent’ enough to keep its private
agenda apart from any other corporate interest? What
company funds the Media lab? By posing such
questions, we just begin to recognize the complexity of
the given situation which shadows an optimistic view of
the critical use of technology in socio-cultural and
artistic practices. The pervasive power of capital
encroaches on the criticality of any practice by
historicizing it and packaging it as a ‘cultural product.’
These questions, I think, link up to the issues that I
viewed as central in defining the human existence in the
digitized surveillance era — power, knowledge, and the
body. In this regard, the work of Steve Mann bears much
attention in terms of cultural criticism.

Bibliography
1. Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interview &
Other Writings 1972-1977. 39-158, Ed. Colin Gordon.Trans.
Colin Gordon et al. NewYork: Pantheon Books, 1980.
2. Shoshana Zuboff, In the Age of the Smart Machine.
NewYork: Basic Books, 1988.
3. Steve Mann, “ShootingBack.” The Art of Detection:
Surveillance in Society. Ed. Jennifer Riddell. Exhibition
catalogue at MIT List Visual Art Center. Cambridge: 1997.
4. Jennifer Riddell, ed. The Art of Detection: Surveillance in
Society. Exhibition catalogue at MIT List Visual Art Center.
Cambridge: 1997.
5. Michel Foucault, Discipline & Punish. 206-7, Trans. Alan
Sheridan. New York: Vintage Books, 1977.
6. Jeremy Bentham, Jeremy Bentham: Collected Works. Ed. J.
Bowring. London, 1843.
7. Mark Poster, The Mode of Information. Cambridge, UK:
Polity Press, 1990.
8. David Lyon, The Electoronic Eye: The Rise of Surveillance
Society. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1994.

4

9. James Rule, Private Lives, Public Surveillance. London:
Allen-Lane, 1973.
10. Anthony Giddens, The Nation-State and Violence.
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 1985.
11. Gary T. Marx, Undercover: Police Surveillance in
America. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988.
12. Steve Mann, “Wearable Computing as means for Personal
Empowerment.” A keynote address for The First International
Conference on Wearable Computing ICWC-98 Fairfax VA:
1998.
13. Steve Mann, “ Smart Clothing: The Wearable Computer
and WearCam.” Personal Technologies. 1.1(1997).
14. Clifford Shearing, and Philip Stenning. “From the
Panopticon to Disneyworld: The Development of Discipline.”
Perspectives in Criminal Law. Ed. E. Doob and
E.L.Greenspan. Aurora: Canada Law Books, 1985.

5

