Visualization of Large-Scale Customer Satisfaction Surveys
Using a Parallel Coordinate Tree

Dominique Brodbeck
Macrofocus GmbH
dominique.brodbeck@macrofocus.com

Abstract
Satisfaction surveys are an important measurement tool in
fields such as market research or human resources management.
Serious studies consist of numerous questions and contain answers
from large population samples. Aggregation on both sides, the
questions asked as well as the answers received, turns the multidimensional problem into a complex system of interleaved hierarchies. Traditional ways of presenting the results are limited to onedimensional charts and cross-tables. We developed a visualization
method called the Parallel Coordinate Tree that combines multidimensional analysis with a tree structure representation. Distortion-oriented focus+context techniques are used to facilitate interaction with the visualization. In this paper we present a design
study of a commercial application that we built, using this method
to analyze and communicate results from large-scale customer satisfaction surveys.
Categories and subject descriptors: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g., HCI)]: User Interfaces - Graphical
user interfaces (GUI); H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]:
Communications Applications - Information browsers; J.1
[Administrative Data Processing] - Marketing.
General terms: Design, Human Factors.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: parallel coordinates,
focus+context, hierarchical data, satisfaction survey.

1. Introduction
Business process automation, together with the insight that
backwards-looking financial metrics are not a sufficient indicator
for the state of an enterprise, have led to the emergence of performance measurement management systems such as balanced scorecards [Kaplan and Norton 1992]. Tools to monitor and interpret all
the different indicators collected across the enterprise are needed.
One of the important aspects that is measured by such systems is
customer satisfaction, based on the assumption, that the perceived
service quality is a key factor for customer acquisition and reten-

IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003,
October 19-21, 2003, Seattle, Washington, USA
0-7803-8154-8/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE

Luc Girardin
Macrofocus GmbH
luc.girardin@macrofocus.com

tion. The most direct way to measure customer satisfaction is to
ask the customers themselves. When done in a statistically sound
way, then the results are accurate, detailed, and enjoy high acceptance by the stakeholders of such a survey.
Public transport in the metropolitan area of Zurich, Switzerland is provided by a heterogeneous mix of private companies and
government agencies. To fuse them into a coherent public transport network, they are governed by a management holding (ZVV)
that is responsible for strategic marketing and financing.
Service quality in the case of public transport is of high
importance, as it not only influences the image of the service providing companies, but also the basic attitude towards public transport. In order to assess, analyze and monitor service quality, ZVV
performs a large-scale study of customer satisfaction for the whole
public transport network every year. The study forms the basis for
performance-based financial compensation of the network partners, as well as to spot concrete service quality problems. Transparent and complete communication of and access to the results is
therefore essential, to support decisions makers in the public transport area and rationalize their decisions.
So far, the results were presented as one-dimensional charts
and cross-tables, both during oral presentations as well as in the
form of a thick folder, containing the details that are deemed relevant. Next to the obvious problems that one expects from such an
approach to represent a large and complex data set (i.e. lack of
overview, inefficient access to details, numbers and tables causing
cognitive overload), there is the problem that it is limited to predefined tables and charts, and therefore can not answer questions
that were not anticipated.
We were given the task of developing an interactive visualization application - SurveyVisualizer - that addresses these problems. The following design objectives were defined:
• Show the data at various levels of detail and aggregation:
Provide an overview of structures and trends, allow comparison
of analysis elements (e.g. young people vs. seniors). Display
details in context.
• Quick access to all the results: Provide possibility to select
elements of all the different analysis groups (e.g. customer segment, market region, service provider). Ensure the integrity of
the numeric values (statistical significance).
• Easy to use and understand by non-experts: Stakeholders
should be able to use the application for interpretation and analysis of the survey results, without any knowledge of statistics or
complex data analysis software. The application should be simple and expressive enough to be used “live“ in strategic business meetings.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

In the following section we will provide details about the survey and the data that is collected, describe the visual encoding that
we chose, and explain the different interaction techniques that tie
everything together. We will explain the design decisions that we
took to meet the above objectives, and discuss the lessons learned.

Roughly 5’000 questionnaires are collected for one survey.
After all the aggregation and averaging is done, the final spreadsheet contains close to 10’000 values. Surveys are repeated yearly
and have been conducted for the past three years.

3. Visual Encoding: The Parallel Coordinate Tree
2. The Survey
The data for the survey is collected through the use of questionnaires that are distributed to the customers of the public transport network. The questionnaire contains 89 questions such as:
If you think of cleanliness, how well does the bus line
that you are using fulfill your expectations in terms of
the inside of the vehicle?
The questions - also called quality criteria - are then aggregated
into 23 quality dimensions (e.g. network quality, ticketing, cleanliness, security, reliability). They represent the level of satisfaction
with a whole group of questions pertaining to a particular issue.
The quality dimensions themselves are further aggregated into
three different customer satisfaction indices, reflecting the different areas of responsibility (tasks for which A: the management
holding is responsible, B: the service providers, and C: the operators). The first two indices have two definitions, reflecting different aggregation methods. Aggregation is performed as a weighted
average, where the weights are determined by an underlying statistical model. The hierarchical structure that is defined by this process is shown in Figure 1.
Customer Satisfaction

3 Indices

23 Quality dimensions

80 Quality criteria (questions)
Tasks A

Tasks B

Tasks C

Figure 1: The data structure of the survey. 89 questions are aggregated into 23 quality dimensions, and then into 3 satisfaction indices (the first two with alternate definitions), adding up to 8’424
values ((89+23+5) nodes * 72 attributes) that need to be represented and accessed for each year of the study.
In addition, the questionnaire contains a number of demographic questions that are used to associate the responses with six
different analysis groups. The groups are further subdivided into a
number of analysis elements (shown in parentheses): benchmarks
(various global averages), market segments (geographic regions),
service providers and operators (individual companies and government agencies), customer segments (age and activity groups),
means of transportation (bus, tram, train). The analysis groups
encompass a total of 72 analysis elements, some of which are also
structured as hierarchies (e.g. buses total > city buses, commuter
buses, long-distance buses). These analysis elements are the actual
data objects that are visualized. Individual questionnaires are not
shown directly, they are used as raw material for the aggregation.

Hierarchies are a common strategy to structure large amounts
of information into nested manageable chunks. We find them for
example in tables of contents, file directories, or corporate organization charts. Hierarchical structures can be conceptualized as
inverted trees with the most important, common, or original node
at the top, and several other nodes below each node in a recursive
way. Trees have two properties: the structure of how the nodes are
linked, and the content or the attributes describing each node.
There are many ways to visually encode trees, depending on
whether the emphasis lies on the structure or the content of the
tree.
Tree structures are commonly represented as node-link diagrams. While node-link diagrams are very intuitive, they don’t
scale well for large number of nodes or for unbalanced trees.
Enhancements that have been suggested include distortion-oriented techniques [Lamping et al. 1995], use of interaction and
dynamic pruning [Kumar et al. 1997], or animated 3-dimensional
representations [Robertson et al. 1993] to compress more nodes
into the available screen space. An additional problem of node-link
diagrams is the representation of node content. The obvious
approach is to use primary visual cues like shape and color to
encode node attribute values, or more sophisticated icons
[Kleiberg et al. 2001]. This is limited to only a few dimensions
however, before the design space becomes overloaded.
Alternatives to node-link diagrams that emphasize node content, are enclosure-based representations, namely Tree-Maps
[Johnson and Shneiderman 1991]. A node attribute is directly
mapped to area by recursively subdividing the available screen
space. This method works very well to visualize attribute values of
a large number of nodes. Color and other perceptual cues can be
mapped to the shapes, but these approaches suffer from the same
problem that only a very small number of attributes can be
encoded simultaneously for each node in this way.
The hierarchy of the survey described in the previous section,
represents a balanced tree with uniform depth, meaning that all the
nodes have a similar number of child nodes, and all the branches
from the root node to the leaf nodes have the same length. While
the structure is important, it is not overly complex. The attributes
however, corresponding to the analysis elements of the survey, are
high-dimensional (72 dimensions, one for each analysis element),
but they are homogeneous in that they all describe perceived customer satisfaction on a scale from 0 to 100. Our challenge was
therefore to represent the tree structure of the hierarchy, while at
the same time allow for multi-dimensional analysis of the node
attributes.
In order to achieve this, we chose a Cartesian node-link layout as a basis to represent the tree structure. Tree depth is mapped
onto the vertical direction, and node position onto the horizontal
direction. We represent each node in this layout by its own vertical
axis. This naturally creates a parallel coordinate system [Inselberg
and Dimsdale 1990] for each level of the hierarchy. To layout the
axes, we start at the bottom level, arranging them laterally and
equally spaced. The nodes of the next level up are positioned cen-

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 2: The SurveyVisualizer application. The top view contains the Parallel Coordinate Tree. The tree structure is shown as a combination
of a node-link diagram and an enclosure-based layout. Each level forms a horizontal parallel coordinate system. The values of a particular
analysis element are shown as polygonal lines on all levels simultaneously (red and black lines). The second view at the bottom shows the
different analysis groups (from left to right: benchmarks, market regions, service providers, operators, customer segments, means of transportation). Both views are coordinated and elements can be selected in either one of them.

tered above the child nodes that they represent. We continue this
way until the top is reached. The hierarchical structure is emphasized by recursively underlaying each node and its children with a
grey box whose intensity varies with the depth of the node (from
grey at the root to white at the leaf level). The background coloring
changes dynamically as the structure is probed with the mouse
pointer (see section 4).
The root node is ignored, as it would be a very inefficient use
of space if it was assigned its own level. We first inserted the root
node as just one additional index on the first level (without child
nodes). While this did work, it did not add enough interesting
information and thus was left away for simplicity reasons.
A particular analysis element is now represented by connecting all the values on the respective node axes of a level with a
polygonal line. Missing values (caused by insufficient statistical
significance) are shown as gaps, and cases where both neighboring
values are missing, are represented with a short horizontal dash
(see black line at bottom left in Figure 2). All the analysis elements

are always shown as grey lines in the background. This provides
an overview of the ranges and spreads of the individual values for
each node, and facilitates the detection of outliers. Clicking on a
background line, selects that analysis element and paints it in a different color (see next section).
We call this visual encoding a Parallel Coordinate Tree (Figure 2). It combines the advantages of a familiar tree layout with the
multidimensional analysis capabilities of parallel coordinates.
The data from different years can be combined and displayed
simultaneously to analyze changes of satisfaction values over time.
The lines of the older studies are then painted with decreasing saturation, creating a “fading out” effect. This method scales to about
four to five different studies, which is sufficient for the purpose of
this particular application. Figure 3 shows the results from two
years. The top level tells us that satisfaction has increased for this
particular group of tasks. Examining the more detailed level
below, reveals that this was mainly due to a significant increase in
the satisfaction with the handling of complaints. Looking at the

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

size either a particular level of the tree, or a specific group of questions. The lens offers predefined focus areas, corresponding to the
headings at the top and along the left side of the tree. Clicking on
one of these heading buttons, moves the focus to the selected
range. The transition between these predefined foci is animated, to
maintain context and temporal coherence, and to avoid the problem of change blindness [Rensink et al. 1997; Nowell et al. 2001].
Figure 4 shows the lens active in both directions. Note how the
trend of the values outside of the focus area is still perceivable.
A common technique to coordinate two views is brushing
and linking [Becker and Cleveland 1987], where users can select
objects in one view and the corresponding objects in all the other
views are also automatically selected. Over the course of using and
building many applications that support this technique, we developed a refined approach. We distinguish two modes of brushing
and linking interaction (selecting, painting) that are coordinated
among the two views, plus a transient exploration mode (probing):

Figure 3: Results from studies of different years can be combined
using a “fading out“ effect (older years are colored with less saturation). Changes over time become quickly apparent on all aggregation levels.
individual questions at the bottom level, confirms that this seems
to have been the case equally for all aspects. We further see that
there are some interesting effects more towards the left, where the
changes cancel each other.
A second view below the Parallel Coordinate Tree is used to
visualize the analysis groups and its constituting analysis elements.
The hierarchical structures of the analysis elements are represented
as indented outlines. The two views are coordinated in terms of
“selecting items to items“ and “selecting items to navigating
views“ (selecting an item in the tree navigates the outline to the
corresponding item) according to the taxonomy of [North and
Shneiderman 1997].

4. Interaction Techniques
To navigate the Parallel Coordinate Tree, we chose a distortion-oriented technique [Leung and Apperley 1994]. A bifocal lens
[Apperley et al. 1982] can be applied in both directions to empha-

Figure 4: Navigating the tree using a bifocal lens. Details of the
customer satisfaction of a particular company (black line) can easily be compared to the benchmark of the overall network (blue
line). The context outside of the focus area is maintained.

• Probing: This mode is used to reveal more details about a node
(i.e. full axis labels, numeric values, enclosing node structure).
Probing is a transient operation. Moving the mouse pointer over
a node, highlights that node. As soon as the mouse pointer is
moved away, the highlighting disappears. It is used like a flashlight that examines a dark room.
• Selecting: This mode is used to mark analysis elements that are
of short-term interest, in order to further examine or perform
operations on them (e.g. explore numeric values for individual
questions, dimensions or indices). Clicking on an analysis element selects it and marks it in black.
• Painting: This mode is used to mark analysis elements that are
of long-term interest, in order to use them as references for
comparisons (e.g. compare various service providers against a
benchmark). Selected analysis elements can be painted by
pressing one of the predefined color buttons in the toolbar at the
bottom of the window. Analysis elements remain painted until
they are reset explicitly.

5. Conclusion
We described SurveyVisualizer, an application to communicate and interpret the results from a large-scale customer satisfaction survey. It provides the overview of the structure of the survey
and the trends of the results. Details are embedded in this context
and can easily be accessed and compared. SurveyVisualizer is a
very effective tool to replace the traditional tables-and-chartsbased way of presenting such survey results. We do not conclude
this on the basis of formal user studies, but rather from anecdotal
user feedback and the fact that it enjoys encouraging commercial
success.
We introduced the Parallel Coordinate Tree, a visual encoding to represent multi-attribute hierarchies. Preliminary experiments have shown, that this method also works with somewhat
unbalanced trees with up to a few hundred leaves and about 5 hierarchical levels deep. Another topic for future work is how the ability of parallel coordinates to handle non-uniform scales can be
used, to visualize surveys with less homogeneous attribute ranges
than in the present example. This makes it an interesting candidate
for visualizing other problems in areas such as accounting, OLAP
analysis, or product catalogs. A combination with integrated
dynamic queries to allow for deeper analyses, is envisioned.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

6. References
APPERLEY, M.D., TZAVARAS, I. AND SPENCE, R. 1982. A Bifocal Display
Technique for Data Presentation. In Proceedings of Eurographics'82,
Conference of the European Association for Computer Graphics, pp. 2743.
BECKER, R. AND CLEVELAND, W. 1987. Brushing Scatterplots. Technometrics, 29 (1987), pp. 127-142.
INSELBERG, A. AND DIMSDALE, B. 1990. Parallel Coordinates: A Tool for
Visualizing Multidimensional Geometry. In Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Visualization ‘90. pp. 361-378.
JOHNSON, B. AND SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1991. Tree-Maps: A Space-Filling Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical Information Structures. In
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization ‘91, pp.
275-282.
KAPLAN, R. AND NORTON, D. 1992. The Balanced Scorecard - Measures
that Drive Performance. Harvard Business Review, Jan-Feb 1992, pp. 7179.
KLEIBERG, E., VAN DE WETERING, H., AND VAN WIJK, J. J. 2001. Botanical
Visualization of Huge Hierarchies. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization 2001, pp. 87-94.
KUMAR, H. P., PLAISANT, C., AND SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1997. Browsing Hierarchical Data with Multi-Level Dynamic Queries and Pruning. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 46(1), pp. 103-124.
LAMPING, J., RAO, R., AND PIROLLI, P. 1995. A Focus+Context Technique
Based on Hyperbolic Geometry for Visualizing Large Hierarchies. In
Proceedings of CHI '95, ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York.
LEUNG, Y. K. AND APPERLEY, M. D. 1994. A Review and Taxonomy of Distortion-Oriented Presentation Techniques. ACM Transactions of Computer-Human Interaction, Vol 1, No. 2. June 1994, pp. 126-160.
NORTH, C. AND SHNEIDERMAN, B. 1997. A Taxonomy of Multiple Window
Coordinations. University of Maryland, College Park, Dept. of Comp.
Science Tech. Report #CS-TR-3854.
NOWELL, L.T., HETZLER, E. G., AND TANASSE, T. 2001. Change Blindness
in Information Visualization: A Case Study. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001, pp. 15-22. 2001.
RENSINK, R. A., O’REGAN, J. K., AND CLARK, J. J. 1997. To See or Not to
See: The Need for Attention to Perceive Changes in Scenes. Psychological Science, 8, pp. 368-373.
ROBERTSON, G. G., CARD, S. K., AND MACKINLAY, J. D. 1993. Information
Visualization Using 3D Interactive Animation. Communications of the
ACM, 36(4), pp. 57-71.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

