Visualization for a Multi-Sensor Data Analysis
Sang Ok Koo, Hyuk Don Kwon, Chang Geol Yoon, Won Seok Seo, Soon Ki Jung
Virtual Reality Laboratory
Kyungpook Nat’l University, South Korea
{sokoo,hdkwon,ycglove,wonseok}@vr.knu.ac.kr, skjung@knu.ac.kr
Abstract
This work describes our eﬀorts in creating the software in order to analyze the multi-sensor data for gas
transmission pipeline inspection. The amount of data
is usually considerable because the hardware system
that consists of multiple heterogeneous sensors records
multi-sensor values for long-distance inspection. It
imposes a heavy burden on the operators who should
sieve the huge and complex data, detect features of the
pipeline and decide a feature as a signiﬁcant defect.
In our system, the virtual 3D pipeline helps the user
to examine the inside of pipeline intuitively by navigating according to the realistic pipeline trajectory. We
mapped the geographical data of the pipeline and heterogeneous sensor data on the virtual 3D pipeline. Moreover, our system oﬀer the various feature detail views
to help the users rapid and precise decision. Users can
switch the navigation mode and the feature detail mode
easily. Consequently, the virtual pipeline plays a role
as an intuitive interaction metaphor for pipeline inspection.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, modern industrial systems have evolved
towards complex structures that consist of multiple
heterogeneous sensors. At the same time, there is an
urgent need to develop methods for integrating multisensor data. In many cases, the parameters aﬀecting
the characteristics of multi-sensor data are numerous
and the dependencies between them are ambiguous.
For this reason, eﬃcient data-level integration, such
as data fusion, needs to be suﬃciently pre-anlayzed by
humans. On the other hand, visual integration using
multivariate visualization techniques can help humans
understand data easily without a thorough data analysis. An admittedly eﬃcient form of visual integration
is the platform in which humans are immersed into a

point of view or an alternate real world.
The amount of data of inspection systems is usually
considerable because successive multiple sensory data
are recorded in a very short time, such as a millisecond or nanosecond, over a long period. Sensor data
have some noise which is caused by the sensor itself or
the sensing environment whereby an analyzer has diﬃculties in detecting suspicious sections through out the
entire inspected region. For this reason, many analyzers employ signal processing techniques by automatic
ﬁltering or calibration and AI(Artiﬁtial Intelligence)
techniques are applied in order to classify speciﬁc features automatically. The performance of an automatic
classiﬁer, however, is not entirely reliable although it
can be quite accurate according to the type of data.
In order to satisfy industrial requirements for analysis
accuracy, feature identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation by humans is essential. Eﬃcient visualization provides clues
reagrding the meaning of the data.
Our research investigated the creation of software
that can visualize and analyze multivariate time-series
data, that is acquired by pipeline inline inspection instruments which consist of multiple heterogeneous sensors. A pipeline is a large pipe which is used to carry oil
or natural gas over a long distance, often underground.
A pipeline inspection gauge or PIG is a device which
is inserted into a pipeline. The PIG is propelled by
the pressure of the medium ﬂow to do a speciﬁc task
within the pipeline. Pipelines represent a considerable
investment and can often prove strategic to countries
and governments. In order to protect these valuable
investments, maintenance must be done and pigging is
one such maintenance tool. Inline inspection PIGs are
designed to assess the pipeline condition on a periodic
basis.
In order to obtain accurate information of a pipeline,
it is necessary for the operator to examine closely the
multi-sensor data for the entire region that is inspected.
Although the operator has expert technical knowledge
about signal patterns, it is diﬃcult and very time con-

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

suming to ﬁnd abnormal signals win a vast amount of
data and to assess pipeline features. Therefore, the efﬁcient visualization of PIG data is an important issue
for the operator when pipeline conditions have to be
assessed often within a few hours.
In Section 2, we look at related research in ﬁelds
whereby humans factor in interface design and the multivariate visualization in various domains. In Section
3, we describe the hardware systems for data acquisition for a pipeline inspection and show the dataset and
feature set. In Section 4, we describe the analysis software requirements and an overview. In this section,
we illustrate basic views in the integrated visualization
framework and describe, in particular, the implementation of the virtual pipeline as an intuitive interaction
metaphor. Finally, conclusions are oﬀered in the ﬁnal
section.

2
2.1

2.3

Multivariate data visualization

Related Work
Human factors in a user interface

Scientists and engineers, who study mechanical systems, often face complex problems which requires
large-scale calculations. Sometimes the size of the
problems can be the equivalent of as much as dozens
of ﬁles, each with several hundred thousand zones that
involve a dozen or more variables. The disparity between the rapid generation of scientiﬁc data and timeconsuming analysis has caused widespread interest in
developing more eﬀective computer support regarding
data analysis [13, 14, 18]. The eﬀectiveness of the analyzing tools depends not only on adequate functionality, but also on a human-computer interface which
reﬂects the goals of the scientiﬁc data analysis process.
Design Gallery [15] is a representative example of a
generative interface which can be selected or organized
by the user. The DG framework presents the methodology for computer-assisted parameter tuning in order
to achieve the desired graphical eﬀects. Large visualization systems contain modules whereby users can
connect together into a data-ﬂow network to create visualizations. These systems oﬀer many advantages for
rapidly-building applications. Examples of such systems include ConMan [16], AVS [18], IRIS Explorer
[20], IBM Data Explorer [17], and Visualization Toolkit
(VTK) [19]. In general, existing visualization systems
are designed to visualize a single dataset at a time.

2.2

methods for the many diﬀerent data types such as
one, two, three, multi-dimensional, network and tree
[1, 2, 3, 4]. Each data type is combined with an appropriate visualization technique in order to extract
useful information from the view. For example, the
one-dimensional data type, such as temporal data, has
been presented as a wave view in ThemeRiver [5]. Twodimensional visualization includes a scatter plot, a line
graph, and a heat map. Two-dimensional visualization techniques also support the notion that the user
can understand the data directly when it uses a variety of color mappings. Three-dimensional visualization
allows the user to perfect virtual space by using information that contains roll, pitch and yaw [6].

Various visualization techniques

Visualization techniques are needed to visualize
many types of data. There are various visualization

The visual exploration of multivariate data is of
great interest in all areas of scientiﬁc inquiry. The
purpose of multivariate visualization is to simplify the
complex data which can have many dimensions at one
time [7]. There are numerous multivariate visualization
techniques, for example, volume model, surface plot,
contour plot, image plot, coplot, scatter plot brushing
and linking, and animated mesh surface [8]. Scatterplot matrix and parallel coordinates are especially ﬂexible multivariate visualization techniques, which perform well in a wide variety of visualization situations
[9]. A scatterplot matrix consists of an array of panels which present adjacent scatterplots of a multivariate dataset. Parallel coordinates [10] use parallel axes
to plot a multivariate dataset. Wong and Bergeron
[11] present a multivariate data exploration method
through a low-dimensional data overview based on metric scaling such as principal components. Nevertheless,
visual representation, whereby a user can understand
all multivariate information with only one view, is either very diﬃcult or practically impossible in some situations. In addition, some scaled or ﬁltered views can
distort the original data, whereby human can misinterprete the data. In order to provide the user with
accurate data, therefore, multiple angles and multiple
scales, that are complementary to each other, should
be used simultaneously.
Papson et al. [12] developed a virtual reality environment for multi-sensor data visualization. They used
a data fusion method integrating graphical, functional
and measurement data. The system demonstrates how
virtual reailty could be used for integration, however,
is it not applied to a real distance analysis.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

3

Multi-Sensor Data Acquisition

PIGs are tools that detect the mechanical damage
of a pipeline. Geometry pigs (also known as ”caliper
pigs”) are a class of in-line inspection tools that measure the shape and size of the pipeline and its position in the right-of-way. Geometry pigs are used inline inspections such as MFL (Magnetic Flux Leakage) pigging, in order to ensure that the MFL pig can
pass safely through the pipeline. MFL pigs can detect
pipeline wall-loss defects which are caused primarily by
corrosion.
A Geometry pig uses multiple sensing axes, together
with multichannel recording, in order to collect data
that record the pipe radius at many angular positions
around the circumference. Threrefore, geometry pigs
are equipped with ﬁngers (calipers), odometer wheels,
an IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit), a tracking transmitter and a DAS (Data Acquisition System) [22]. The
geometry pig rapidly travels through a natural gas
pipeline which has valves, welds, bends and tees. The
number of ﬁnger arms mounted on to the pig body increases in correlation with the diameter of the pipe,
which increases the circumference of the pipe wall. An
IMU ties location information to GPS coordinates and
odometer wheels travel along the inside of the pipeline
in order to measure the distance and speed of the pig.
In passing through a pipeline, the geometry pig records
the displacement of all ﬁngers every second. A DAS is a
large data storage system which store all sensor values,
while a pig travels over a long distance from a launcher
to a receiver.
Typically, a MFL pig consists of two or more bodies;
one body is the magnetizer with magnets and sensors
and the other body contain electronics and batteries
[21]. The magnets are mounted between the brushes
and the tool body to create a magnetic circuit along
the pipe wall. As the tool travels along the pipe, the
sensors detect interruptions in the magnetic circuit. Interruptions are typically caused by metal loss, which
in most cases is corrosion. As ”brains” of the smart
pig, the other body, electronics, contain batteries, an
IMU, a DAS and odometer wheels. The sensors detect
changes in the magnetic ﬁeld in the three directions
(axial, radial, and circumferential) in order to characterize the anomaly.

3.1

Data Sets

There are several types of sensors in pigs: Fingers, magnetic sensors, IMU (gyroscope, acceleration),
odometer, pressure and temperature sensors. The
multi-sensor data are stored in a DAS and a user needs

several steps in order to get the sensor data after pigging. First, when the user downloads the data from a
DAS, the raw data that consist of a bit array are acquired. The raw data must be parsed and converted
so that they can be managed by a PC. Next, in order
to reduce noise and set calibrated data, processes such
as a low-pass ﬁlter, and binary interpolation must be
performed. Finally, the data are stored in a database.
The database has a signal stream with ﬁxed-distance
intervals, which are converted from the original data.
The use of the database accelerates the performance
of our visualization system by the eﬃcient caching of
sensor data.
Each sensor has a diﬀerent sample rate up to 800
Hertz. Usually, the traveling distance of a pig can
change between tens of kilometers and thousands of
kilometers. If the traveling time is 12 hours, the size
of the pigging data is about 1.8 Gbyte in our geometry pig system. The MFL pig data size is much more
than that of the geometry pig, since the density of the
magnetic sensors is very high. In our system, MFL pigs
have the three types of hall-eﬀect sensors (axial, radial,
and circumferential) and an eddy sensor. Each sensor
has between 170 and 300 channels, while the geometry
pigs have between 20 and 35 channels.

3.2

Feature Set

We can be divided the pipeline features into ﬁxtures, markers, welds, bend and anomalies. Fixtures
are pieces of equipment, for example valves and oﬀtakes, which are ﬁxed inside or outside a pipeline while
the pig moves. Anomalies are indications of an irregularity or deviation from sound weld or base pipe material.
In the case of geometry pigs, welds, bends, dents and
ovalities are the most popular and important features.
A weld is a feature in the body or the heat-aﬀected
zone. A bend is a part of the pipeline which is bent
from the manufacturing stage. A dent is a distortion
of the pipe wall which result in a change in the internal
diameter, but not necessarily result in a localized reduction of the wall thickness. An ovality is the measure
of the out-of-roundness of the pipeline.
A MFL pig is able to accurately assess the severity of corrosion features, dents, wrinkles, buckles, and,
in some cases, cracks. Corrosion is an electrochemical reaction of the pipe wall with its environment
which causes a loss of metal. A crack is a planar,
two-dimensional feature which shows displacement of
the fracture surfaces. A gouge is mechanically induced
metal-loss, which causes localized elongated grooves or
cavities.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

4

Visual Analysis System

The type of data which we treat in this paper represents a vast amount of time-series multi-channel data.
The primary purpose of a pig is to detect anomalies
in a pipeline. Our system allows users to detect features as small as 1 cm by 1 cm. We have to be able
to visualize the drift of the data stream and to distinguish feature signals, which can occurr in an abnormal
signal region. Therefore, an analysis system, such as
pig data analysis software, has to satisfy the following
requirements:
• Intuitive basic views reﬂecting data characteristics
• Scalable data visualization
• Accuracy of depicted data
• Rapid data access and free navigation
• Automatic feature classiﬁcation/characterization
(for processing a huge amount of data)
• Manual feature classiﬁcation/characterization
• Detailed views of various features
• Information (feature) retrieval
• Various reporting formats, for examples, statistical charts, and graphs.
First, it is important to select or deﬁne basic visualization methods suitable for data characteristics. The
operator, however, can not make an accurate decision
by using only one type of visualization, since variations in sensor data are sometimes very ambiguous. In
order to reduce this ambiguity, we suggest the integrated visualization interface which manages various
views simultaneously. Furthermore, we suggest the virtual pipeline view as an intuitive interaction metaphor.
The structure of the virtual pipeline is very close to
that of a real pipeline, which allows users practice in
interpreting data.

4.1

Analysis Software Overview

Pig data is multi-channel sensor data, whereby all
sensors are time-series. Multiple values from the various sensors should be synchronized by distance and
presented concurrently when analyzing. Our software
provides integrated multiple view interfaces, which can
enable users to deﬁne the layout and switch at will.
Integrated views can recognize problematic areas and
can assist in understanding the complex situation that

is being investigated. They also allow for a comprehensive review of diﬀerent options.
The ﬁnal objective of this software is to create well
written survey reports. The ﬁnal reports include information about a pipelines location, which is visualized
with the help of a plan view, proﬁle and velocity views.
Various factors can be accurately measured, computed
and reported. They include pipeline alignment, the direction and orientation of the horizontal and vertical
bends with respect to angle, radius, direction and location. The survey reports also present information
about abnomalies such as dents and ovalities. Signiﬁcant features should be described in precise detail by a
picture of a digging sheet, which presents information
for raking up a region that has signiﬁcant problems.
Therefore, ensuring accurate analysis is one of the most
critical issues in software design.

4.2

Implementation

In this paper, visual integration has two meanings; it
is the implementation of integrated viewing interfaces
and it is the mapping of multiple heterogeneous data
to a particular view. In our application, an analyst
can deﬁne their own integrated viewing layout based
on a particular combination of basic visual mappings.
Eﬀective visual integration provides the user with an
accurate point-of-view of multiple heterogeneous data.
Data synchronized at a particular time, can help a user
to understand complex information intuitively. The
virtual 3D pipeline is employed as a medium for integration.
4.2.1

Multiple Views

Multiple sensor data can be illustrated using multiple
views. We suggest several basic visual mappings for
multi-sensor data visualization, as shown in Fig. 1.
According to data characteristics, these views can have
a number of variations. Sometimes, these views are
shown simultaneously for complementary visualization
as shown in Fig. 2.
4.2.2

Virtual Pipeline

A virtual pipeline can be implemented by the following methods, using only instrumental navigation data
which were estimated from IMU sensor data. The instrumental navigation data include the absolute position of the pig and the rotation information of the pig
which are given as pitch, roll and yaw.
We can obtain pig movement trajectory by tracing
the absolute position of the pig. As can be seen in
Fig. 2, the set of absolute positions is denoted as

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

{o1 , o2 , , on }. For the construction of a 3D pipeline
volume, we must generate the vertex information of
the triangle meshes which consist of the pipeline surface. First, we deﬁne the initial vectors y and z at the
point of the absolute position as the following: Let the
cross product of y and z be vector x. Vector y’ can be
achieved through the cross product of the normalized
vectors x’ and z.
s2

y'
y'

o2

z

o1

o1

Figure 4. The surface of a virtual pipeline.

s1
x'

x'

(b)

(a)

Figure 3. The generation of volume data for
the implementation of a virtual pipeline.

⎛

⎞
0
y = ⎝ 1 ⎠,
0
x = z × y,

x =

−−
→
z=o
1 o2 .

1
||x||

,

y = x × z.

s1 = x cos θ + y cos θ + o1 ,
s2 = x cos 2θ + y cos 2θ + o1 ,
..
.

pipeline image of a bend and rendered views in our
system. The second and third images from left are the
outside and inside view of a virtual pipeline, respectively. The fourth image from left is a view whereby
the sensor data are integrated into the pipeline circumferential direction of a pipeline. The far right image is
the 3D surface view of the same region.
4.2.3

(1)

(2)

(3)

sn = x cos nθ + y cos nθ + o1 .
We can get the vertex information by transforming
the absolute position as shown in the Fig. 2 (b) and
Equation 1. Finally, we apply the rolling information of
the pig body, as the inverse of the rotation of each vertex, which is as much as that of the rolling value. The
pipeline surfaces are constructed by drawing triangular meshes using the corresponding verties of successive
circles. Fig. 3 shows an example of the virtual pipeline
surface, which was generated by this method.
Despite the absence of any external GIS data or
a pipeline map, virtual pipelines, which were implemented as the above method, are almost exact replicate of real pipeline. A virtual pipeline view shows its
advantages when it bend features are represented. The
curvature and strain of a bend can be natually represented in a virtual pipeline. Thus, users can perceive
the pipeline geometry much easier than when it is inferred from numerical values. This is very useful since
the results of the bend feature analysis have a significant eﬀect on other features. Fig. 4 shows the real

User Interaction and Navigation Method

All views including the virtual pipeline, are synchronized each with regard to distance. Our system supports random distance access by a user’s distance input
as well as a sequential movements by interaction with a
key or mouse. In addition, within the virtual pipeline,
color image, 3D surface and polar view, a user can roll
over the circumference of a pipeline.
It takes a great deal of time to examine the entire
pigging data because the total inspection distances are
vary between 50km and 1,000km, the smallest distance
is 5mm. In order that analysts do not get inundated
with vast amout of data, our system provides automatic navigation, forward or backward, by thread programming. There is also the advantage of accelerating
analysis speed. The case of virtual pipeline, animation which can navigate inside and outside a virtual
pipeline, allows users to immerse themselves in examination of a pipeline.
Furthermore, a user can take feature recordsets from
database by querying according to the kind of features
or other conditions. Then, detecting a particular feature, a user can go to the position of the feature.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we suggested a practical method for
analyzing multi-sensor data, in an industrial domain,
based on visual integration. First, an integrated visualization interface is helpful to assist humans decision
that is given a great deal of weight on the accurate data

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

analysis. Second, to integrate heterogeneous information on a medium is one of the most eﬀective methods
to realize immersion, navigation and interaction.
We developed pig data analysis software which is a
powerful and user-friendly diagnostic tool. The proposed software oﬀers a ﬂexible visualization interface,
whereby analysts can deﬁne their visualization methods for a particular feature based upon their knowledge about the domain. Furthermore, the proposed
system allows users to explore the virtual pipeline,
which was constructed by visually integrating multiple
heterogeneous sensor data. The virtual pipeline represents pipeline features such as bends naturally and
accurately. As a result, our system contributes to the
performance, accuracy and speed of analyzing results.

References
[1] B. Shneiderman, ”The eyes have it: a task by data
type taxonomy for information visualizations,”
Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, p.p. 336–343, 1996.
[2] D.A. Keim, ”Information Visualization and Visual
Data Mining,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 8, No. 1, p.p.
1–8, 2002.

[10] Pak Chung Wong and R. Daniel Bergeron. ”30
Years of Multidimensional Multivariate Visualization. Scientiﬁc Visualization: Overview, Methodologies, Techniques,” IEEE Computer Society
Press, 1997.
[11] Pak Chung Wong and R. Daniel Bergeron, ”Multivariate Visualization Using Metric Scaling,” Vis
’97, p.p. 111–ﬀ .
[12] Scott Papson et al., ”A virtual reality environment
for multi-sensor data integration,” Proceedings of
the Sensors for Industry Conference, New Orleans,
LA, January, 2004.
[13] L. Treinish,
”An Interactive,
DisciplineIndependent Data Visualization System”,
Computers in Physics, Vol. 3, No. 4, 1989.
[14] R. Wolﬀ, ”Visualization Challenges in the Physical Sciences,” in Computer Graphics and Animation in the Physical Sciences, ACM SIGGRAPH
Course Notes 28, 1987.
[15] J. Marks et al., ”Design Galleries: A General
Approach to Setting Parameters for Computer
Graphics and Animation”, Proceedings of the
SIGGRAPH ’97, p.p. 389–400, 1997.

[3] C. Daassi et al., ”Visualization process of Temporal Data,” DEXA 2004, p.p. 914–924. 2004.

[16] Paul E. Haeberli, ”ConMan: A visual programming language for interactive graphics,” Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH ’88, Vol. 22, p.p. 103–111,
August 1988.

[4] J.D. Fekete and C. Plaisant, ”Interactive Information Visualization to the Million Item,” INFOVIS
2002, p.p. 117–124. 2002.

[17] Greg Abram and Lloyd Treinish, ”An extended
data-ﬂow architecture for data analysis and visualization,” Computer Graphics, 29(3), May 1995.

[5] S. Havre et al., ”ThemeRiver: Visualizing Thematic Changes in Large Document Collection,”
IEEE Transaction on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, Vol. 8 No. 1, p.p. 9–20, 2002.

[18] Craig Upson et al., ”The Application Visualization System: A computational environment for
scientiﬁc visualization,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, p.p. 30-42, July 1989.

[6] H. Piringer, R. Kosara, and H. Hauser, ”Interactive Focus+ Context Visualization with Linked
2D/3D Scatterplots,” CMV’04, p.p. 49–60. 2004

[19] William J. Schroeder et al., ”The Visualization
Toolkit: An Object-Oriented Approach to 3D
Graphics 3rd Edition,” Prentice Hall, 2004.

[7] C.H., Yu, and J.T. Behrens, ”Applications of scientiﬁc multivariate visualization to behavioral sciences,” Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
and Computers, Vol. 27, p.p. 264–271, 1995.

[20] IRIS
Explorer
home
page.
http://www.nag.com, February, 1999.

[8] John Maindonald and John Braun, ”Data Analysis and Graphics Using R.,” Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2003. ISBN 0-521-81336-0
[9] Alfred Inselberg and Bernard Dimsdale, ”Parallel coordinates: A tool for visualizing multidimensional geometry,” Vis ’90, pages 361–378, 1990.

url:

[21] Raymond Rempel, ”Anomaly detection using
Magnetic Flux Leakage ( MFL ) Technology - Presented at the Rio Pipeline Conference and Exposition,” Rio De Janeiro, Brasil 2005
[22] D.K. Kim et al., ”Developmentof the Caliper System for a Geometry PIG Based on Magnetic Field
Analysis, KSME International Journal, Vol. 17,
No. 12, p.p. 1835-1843, 2003.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 1. Four basic views; line graph (top far left), pseudo color image(top right), 3D surface (top
right), polar view (top far right), histogram view (bottom left) and wave view (bottom right).

Figure 2. A weld detection layout(left) and a tee detection layout(right).

Figure 5. Visual integration for pipeline feature analysis.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

