A Fast Palm Print Verification System
Michael KO Goh, Tee Connie, Andrew BJ Teoh and David CL Ngo
FIST, Multimedia University, Jalan Ayer Keroh Lama, 75450, Melaka, Malaysia
{michael.goh@mmu.edu.my, tee.connie@mmu.edu.my, bjteoh@mmu.edu.my,
david.ngo@mmu.edu.my}
Abstract
Palm print is a relatively new biometric technology.
Palm print textures like principle lines, wrinkles and
ridges contain discriminative information which can be
extracted for verification purpose. In this paper, we aim
to reexamine the competitive palm code scheme
proposed by [6], and introduce some improvement over
the proposed method. In order to reduce the computation
complexity, we adopted wavelet transform to decompose
the palm print image into lower resolution. We are able
to show that wavelet transform when integrated with 2D
Gabor filter is able to yield verification rate of 96.70%,
with an improved verification speed of less than 1
second.
Keywords--- Biometrics, Gabor filter,
Transform, Palm Print, Competitive Rule

Wavelet

1. Introduction
In recent years, many security systems yearn for
more reliable and practicable biometric technology.
Hand geometry biometrics is the first biometric system
introduced in the marketplace in 1970s [1]. Now the
fingerprint authentication system has dominated the
market due to its flexible, fast and stable authentication
ability [2]. However, there are some drawbacks of using
the fingerprint biometrics. First of all, the finger-print is
easy to be stolen. People always touch things like glass,
monitor screen, door handle and water tap with their
fingers. This leaves their fingerprints behind and al-lows
the attacker to obtain the finger print and generate a latex
copy of the print to fool the fingerprint authentication
system [3].
Other forms of biometric authentications like iris
and face also have their limitations [4]. For example, the
iris recognition system is too expensive and is not
practicable to be implemented in public area; while face
recognition has low reliability rate as a person’s
appearance can change over a short period of time
.
For the settings described above, palm print
recognition appears to be an attractive solution [5]. Palm
print is more difficult to be stolen, as large part of the

palm print area would not be left behind even when
people are holding glasses. Besides, the palm print is
stable and it does not change much over time. Most
important of all, palm print contains discriminative
textures like the principle lines, wrinkles and ridges that
are useful for recognition.
In this research, we reexamine the competitive palm
code method proposed by [6]. We tested the winner-takeall rule by using the minimum and maximum schemes.
Besides, we also investigated the method by using three
different feature representations: the index, the index’s
value and the coded index. A comparative study is
conducted to analyze the performance differences among
the three forms of representation. In addition, we tested
with the 2D Gabor function, apart from the Lee Gabor
filter used in [6]. Gabor filter is a useful tool to model the
palm print line segment. As each palm region is covered
by dominant line patterns, these line patterns can be used
to represent the feature of the palm. Therefore, Gabor
filter can be used to extract the orientation information
from the palm lines to represent the palm print feature.
To improve the proposed competitive palm code
technique in terms of its verification rate and processing
speed, we applied the Wavelet Transform (WT) to first
decompose the palm print image into multi-resolution
representations before feeding it to Gabor operation. In
decomposing the image into lower resolution images,
WT can conserve the energy signals and redistribute
them into more compact form. Thus performing
operations in the wavelet domain and then reconstructing
the result is more efficient than performing the same
operation in the standard direct fashion. The block
diagram of our proposed system is shown in Figure 1.
In this paper, we only present the feature extraction
method and matching techniques. The details of the
image acquisition, region of interest (ROI) location
method and preprocessing steps can be found in [7] and
[8]. This paper is organized as follow: Section 2
highlights the wavelet transform method used to reduce
the palm print image without losing the important feature
information. Section 3 discusses the use of Gabor filter
to generate the palm print features and how this
information can be coded effectively by using the
competitive scheme. Section 4 highlights the distance

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

matching methods that are applied to classify the palm
print images. Lastly, section 5 reports the experimental
results and also the comparison with other algorithms by
using the same palm print database.

The wavelet decomposition of a signal f(x) can be
obtained by convolution of the signal with a family of
real orthonormal basis, ȥa,b(x)
−
§ x−b·
2
(Wψ f (x))(a,b) =| a| 2 ³ f (x)ψ¨
¸dx f (x)∈L (ℜ)
a
©
¹
ℜ
1

Original
palmprint image

Feature
Matching

Gaussian low
pass filter

Wavelet
Transform

Competitive Gabor
features:
i)
value
ii) index
iii) gray code
Gabor Filter

Figure 1: Block diagram of the proposed fast
palm print recognition method.

2. Image Preprocessing
2.1 Wavelet Transform
In general, Wavelet Transform (WT) is a tool that
decomposes images into different frequency components
and then studied each component with a resolution
matched to its scale [9]. Therefore, WT is well-known
for providing economical and informative mathematical
representation for many research areas [10].
In this research, WT is used to decompose the palm
print images into lower resolution representation.
However, before the WT was applied, we enhanced the
contrast of the palm print images so that the dominant
palm print features like principal lines and ridges can be
highlighted and be disguisable from the palm surface.
Besides, we also applied the Gaussian low pass filter to
smoothen the palm print images. Figure 2 shows the
palm print image before and after the contrast adjustment
and smoothing functions are applied.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Palm print image (a) before contrast
adjustment and Gaussian smoothing. (b) after
contrast adjustment and Gaussian smoothing.

(1)

where a, b ∈ ℜ and a  0 are the dilation parameter and
the translation parameter respectively.
For 2D signal such as images, there exists an
algorithm similar to the one-dimensional case for two
dimensional wavelets and scaling functions obtained
from one-dimensional ones by tensiorial product. This
kind of two-dimensional wavelet transform leads to a
decomposition of approximation coefficients at level j-1
in four components: the approximations at level j, Lj and
the details in three orientations (horizontal, vertical and
diagonal), Djvertical,, Djhorizontal and Djdiagonal. [11].

L j (m, n) = [H x ∗[H y ∗ Lj −1 ]↓2,1 ]↓1,2 (m, n)

(2)

Djvervital (m, n) = [Hx ∗[Gy ∗ Lj−1]↓2,1]↓1,2 (m, n)

(3)

Djhorizontal (m, n) = [Gx ∗[Hy ∗ Lj−1]↓2,1]↓1,2 (m, n)

(4)

Dj diagonal (m, n) = [Gx ∗[Gy ∗ L j −1 ]↓2,1 ]↓1,2 (m, n)

(5)

Figure 3 shows the palm print image appearing in
different wavelet subbands. Figure 3 (a) depicts the
decomposition process by applying the 2D WT of a palm
print image in level 1. Similarly, two levels of the
wavelet decomposition obtained by applying WT on the
low-frequency band are shown in Figure 3(b).
In this paper, two levels of decompositions are being
performed on the palm print images. Reduce of the
image resolution helps to decrease the computation load
of the feature extraction process. More details about the
decomposition process are provided in the experiment
and result section.

(a) 1-level wavelet
decomposition

(b) 2-level wavelet
decomposition

Figure 3: Palm print image in different wavelet
subbands. (a) 1-level Wavelet decomposition.
(b) 2-level Wavelet decomposition

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

§ 2π x ' ·

3. Feature Extraction Rules
3.1. Lee Gabor Filter
The palm print texture consists of strong dominant
lines such as the principle lines and wrinkles; as well as
weak unobtrusive lines such as the creases and ridges.
These palm lines are formed naturally to produce a
unique multi-directional-lines pattern. In this research,
we used the Lee Gabor filter to highlight these multidirectional-lines pattern due to its optimal localization
properties in both the spatial and frequency domains
[12]. Lee Gabor has the following form.
A 2D Gabor function can be viewed as a sinusoidal
plane modulated by a Gaussian envelope. A typical 2D
Gabor filter for an image domain (x, y) is defined as
k ·
§ iω x'
−
¨¨ e − e 2 ¸¸ (6)
©
¹
where x ' = x cos θ + y sin θ and y ' = − x sin θ + y cos θ ;
and ω is the radial frequency in radians per unit length.
ϕ
The value of k is defined by k = 2 ln 2 ¨§ 2 + 1 ¸· , where
ϕ
© 2 −1 ¹

ω 2 § '2 '2 ·
4x + y ¸
2¨

−
ω
GLee ( x, y, ω ,θ ) =
e 8k
2π k

©

2

¹

ϕ is the half-amplitude bandwidth of the frequency

response; and ω =

k . In this research, the optimum

σ

values for ϕ and σ are 1.5 and 0.05, respectively. Figure
3 depicts the texture features obtained after performing
the Gabor filtering process along six different
orientations.

i ¨¨
¸¸
§ x '2 + y '2 ·
© T ¹
(7)
G2 D ( x, y, T , θ ) = exp ¨ −
¸ exp
2
2σ ¹
©
where x ' = x cos θ + y sin θ and y ' = − x sin θ + y cos θ .
The parameters involved in the construction of the
2D Gabor filter include T, the period of the sinusoidal
plane along the direction θ from the x-axis; and σ , the
standard deviation of the Gaussian envelope. We applied
tuning process to optimize the selection of theses
parameters, and T = 10, σ 2 = 32 and θ = π appears to be

6

the best combination.

3.3. Competitive Rules
Based on the winner-take-all competitive rule
proposed by [6], the index ranging from 0 to 5 of the
minimum contrast magnitude was used to represent the
feature of the palm. Therefore, each sample points on the
palm print images are represented by the index value,
forming a feature vector for the palm print. In the
consideration of extending the method to real-time
application, we coded the index so that only three bits
(rather than the 8-bits integer representation) are used to
represent an index element. According to [6], this code
representation is named as Competitive Code.

3. Distance Matching Classifier
3.1. Hamming Distance
The Hamming distance is deployed to count the
fraction of bits that differ between two competitive code
strings. Hamming distance is defined as

d ham ( f , x) = XOR( f , x)

(8)

3.2. Euclidean Distance
(a)

(b)

(c)

The Euclidean distance (L2-norm) is the standard
calculation defined as,

d L2 ( f , x) =
(d)

(e)

d

¦ (x − f )
i

i

2

(9)

i =1

(f)

Figure 4: The palm print textures obtained from
2D Gabor filter with six different angular
settings. The six images (a)-(e) is labeled with
index number from 0 to 5.

3.2. 2D Gabor Filter
Apart from Lee Gabor filter, we have also tested
with the 2D Gabor function. A 2D Gabor function can be
viewed as a sinusoidal plane modulated by a Gaussian
envelope. A typical 2D Gabor filter for an image domain
(x, y) is defined as

5. Experimental Results
5.1. Experimental Setup
In this experiment, a standard PC with Intel Pentium
4 processor (1.8 GHz) and 1024 MB random access
memories is used. Our input device is the Hewlett–
Packard ScanJet 3500c optical scanner. Resolution of
150 dpi, with color output type in 256 RGB (8 bits-perchannel) format is adopted when the hand images are
scanned. The original size of the hand image is about 600

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

× 800 pixels but consequently, only the region of
interest (ROI) of the image will be extracted and resized
to 150 × 150 pixels.
The proposed methodology is tested on a modestsized database containing palm images from 75
individuals. Thirty-seven of them are females, 46 of
them are less than 30 years old, and three of them are
more than 50 years old. The users come from different
ethnic groups: 37 Chinese, followed by 24 Malays, 11
Indian, a Pakistani, an African and an Iranian. Most of
them are students and lecturers from Multimedia
University. To investigate how well the system can
identify unclear or worn palm prints due to laborious
work, we have also invited ten cleaners to contribute
their palm print images to our system.
Each user was requested to provide six images from
their right and left hands with different positions in two
occasions. The average interval between the two
occasions is 3 months. Since the right and left palm
prints of each person are different, both of them are
captured and treated as palm prints from different user.
Therefore, there are altogether 900 (75 × 6 × 2) palm
prints images in our database.
In the first experiment, we compared the result of
the competitive rule by using three different forms,
namely the index, the corresponding feature value of the
index, and also the gray-coded index in bits. In this
paper, for the sake of clear indication purpose, we
address the three feature representations above as
competitive index, competitive value and competitive
code, respectively. To investigate the competitive rule,
we have also tested with the maximum winner-take-all
rule, apart from the minimum scheme proposed by [6].
The Euclidean distance classifier is used to classify the
competitive index and competitive value features; while
the hamming distance classifier is used to classify the
competitive code feature.
In the second set of experiment, we compared the
highest result obtained from the first experiment with the
original competitive rule proposed in [6] by using the
same palm print database. Wavelet Transform is applied
to both 2D Gabor and Lee Gabor to observe the
improvement in speed and verification rate.
5.2. Verification Results
The first experiment compares the performance of
competitive code, competitive index and also
competitive value when integrated with WT. Two types
of competitive rules were tested, namely the maximum
and minimum competitive rules. For WT, we adopted the
Symmlet Order 2 wavelet basis with two levels of
Wavelet decomposition. The result of the experiment is
displayed in Table 1.

From the table, there is no significant difference
between the competitive codes and competitive index
representations. However, the competitive code will be
the most suitable to be used in real-time application
system, as only three bits are required to store a feature
vector as compare to competitive index (type integer, 8bits per feature) and competitive values (type double, 32bits per feature), thus the memory footprint can be
reduced in turn.
In general, it can be observed that second level of
WT performs better than first level WT decomposition in
all the three cases. Among all, second level Wavelet
decomposition competitive code with maximum rule
scheme gives the highest verification result of 96.70%
with Equal Error Rate (EER) close to 4%.
Table 1: Comparative result of the three Gabor
feature representations when combined with the
two competitive rule schemes, together with the
two levels of Wavelet decomposition.
Gabor
Feature

Distance
Classifier

Competitive
Code

Hamming

Competitive
Index

Euclidean

Competitive
Value

Euclidean

Rule/
Wavelet†
Max/L1
Max/L2
Min/L1
Min/L2
Max/L1
Max/L2
Min/L1
Min/L2
Max/L1
Max/L2
Min/L1
Min/L2

FAR

FRR

TSR

7.50
3.25
5.60
4.37
5.99
3.96
5.80
4.38
7.73
5.01
7.72
5.59

5.20
4.00
6.73
4.73
6.00
3.93
5.80
4.40
8.00
4.93
8.00
5.53

92.53
96.70
94.33
95.60
94.00
96.03
94.19
95.61
92.25
94.99
92.26
94.41

†

Rule: Competitive Rule Scheme, {Max, Min}
Wavelet: The two level of Wavelet decomposition, {L1, L2}

5.3. Methods Comparison
In the second experiment, we compared the
performance of Lee Gabor [6] with 2D Gabor filters by
using the competitive code representation. Besides, we
also tested the performance increase when applying
wavelet transform. The comparison among these
methods is shown in Figure 5.
We found that 2D Gabor performs better than Lee
Gabor in our experiment setting. Generally, WT helps to
improve the performance of both Lee Gabor and 2D
Gabor filters. This shows that WT does not only help to
reduce the image size but also increases the performance.
WT has indeed helped to boost the performance of the
original method by proper accounting of global features
without loss of information on key local features.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

[6]

Figure 5: Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curves using four different feature
extraction methods, 2D Gabor, Wavelet + 2D
Gabor, Lee Gabor [6] and Wavelet + Lee Gabor.

5.4 Speed Performance

References

Table 2 shows the comparison of the feature size
and verification speed of using the Lee and 2D Gabor
filters with and without the integration of WT. The
competitive code is used in this comparison. The time is
counted from the point when the original palm print
image is processed until the matching result is obtained.
From Table 2, it can be observed that the speed taken to
verify a person is proportional to the feature size
deployed. This is because the larger the image, the more
time it will take to code the image into bits
representation. From this experiment, we found that the
fastest time taken to verify a person is 0.8 seconds for
two level WT decompositions with 2D Gabor.
Table 2: The feature size (in bits) used by the
methods and the time (in seconds) taken for the
verification process.
Method

Resolution

2D Gabor
Wavelet L1+2D Gabor
Wavelet L2+2D Gabor
Lee Gabor [6]
Wavelet L1+ Lee Gabor
Wavelet L2+ Lee Gabor

150 x 150
76 x 76
39 x 39
150 x 150
76 x 76
39 x 39

important palm print information that is vital to
recognition. We found that the low frequency subband
contain most of the energy content and it is able to
preserve local edges well which helps to capture the
features that are insensitive to small distortion.
Moreover, the subband image is only quarter size of the
original image, thus the computational complexity can be
reduced tremendously by processing on the lower
resolution image.
In this experiment, we only reexamined the
competitive coding scheme proposed by [6], and
improved upon the proposed method by integrating WT
technique with the 2D Gabor filter. However, there are
still large rooms for improvement in this research. Our
future direction is to enhance the current method by
using more sophisticated classifiers like Neural
Networks and also to use error-correcting code like the
Reed-Solomon code to detect and correct the bit errors in
the feature vectors

Feature
Size
(bit)
67500
17328
4563
67500
17328
4563

Time
secs.
29.6
9.2
0.8
30.3
8.5
0.8

6.0 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we presented the fast palm print
verification system by integrating WT, 2D Gabor filter,
together with the competitive code scheme. WT
contributed largely to this research as it does not only
help in reducing the image size, but also retain the

[1]

A.K. Jain, , A. Ross, S. Pankanti, “A Prototype Hand
Geometry-Based Verification System, Proc. of 2nd Int’l
Conf. on Audio- and Video-based Biometric Person
Authentication (AVBPA), 1999, pp. 166-171.
[2] International
Biometric
Group,
url:
http://www.biometricgroup.com/reports/public/market_r
eport.html
[3] X. Qinghan, Security Issues in Biometric Authentication.
Defence R&D, Canada, Ottawa, 2005
[4] Daugman, J.: How Iris Recognition Works. IEEE Conf.
on ICIP (2002)
[5] D. Zhang, W. Kong, J. You, M. Wong, “On-line Palm
print Identification”, IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 2003, vol.
25(9), pp.1041-1050.
[6] W.K. Kong, D. Zhang, “Competitive Coding Scheme for
Palm print Verification”, Proceedings of the 17th Int’l
Conf. on Pattern Recognition, ICPR’04, IEEE, 2004.
[7] K.O.M. Goh, T. Connie, B.J.A. Teoh, C.L.D. Ngo, “A
Single-sensor Hand Geometry and Palm print
Verification System”, ACM SIGMM 2003 Multimedia
Biometrics Methods and Applications Workshop,
Berkeley Marina Radisson, CA, USA, 2003, pp. 100106.
[8] T. Connie, B.J.A. Teoh, K.O.M. Goh, C.L.D. Ngo, “An
Automatic Palm Print Recogntion System”, Image and
Vision Computing Journal, Elsevier Science, UK, 2003,
vol. 23(5), pp. 501-515.
[9] I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Capital City
Press, Montpelier. Vermont, 1992.
[10] F. Abramovich, T. Bailey, T. Sapatias, “Wavelet
Analysis and its Statistical Applications”, JRSSD, 2000,
vol. 48, pp. 1-30
[11] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing,
Acadermic Press, San Diego, 1998.
[12] T.S. Lee, “Image Representation Using 2D Gabor
Wavelet”, IEEE Trans. on PAMI, 1996, vol. 18(10), pp.
959-971.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

