Abstraction and Interaction: an Art System for White Noise
Ernest Edmonds
Australasian CRC for Interaction Design, Creativity and Cognition Studios, FIT, University of
Technology, Sydney
{ernest@ernestedmonds.com}
Abstract
This describes the development of an interactive
audio/visual art system and discusses both the context of
the work, in abstraction and noise, and the employment
of audience testing as an integral part of the process.
Keywords – abstract, concrete, interaction, noise

1. Introduction
The paper discusses an audio/visual art system that
was commissioned for the White Noise exhibition held at
the Australian Centre for the Moving Image, Melbourne,
in 2005 [1]. The key concerns were interaction and
abstraction which, in the case of sound, might be
associated with noise. The paper discusses the theme of
the exhibition, white noise, as well as the concepts of
abstraction and interaction that formed the context for
the development of the work.
The creative development process used an
innovative method for engaging audience involvement
by evaluating a preliminary version of the work in an
experimental space devoted to interactive art within the
Powerhouse Museum, Sydney [2]. The process is
described and the results of using it discussed.
The work described is the latest development in an
creative investigation into the themes of the paper
through art making with and without the use of a
computer [3].

2. White Noise
White noise is perceived when each audible
frequency is equally loud, when nothing, no shape or
form, can be distinguished in the sound. In fact,
engineers also refer to noise of other colours, such as
pink noise in which the volume decreases with
frequency. So noise of different colours has different
forms, but as with colour, white implies that we perceive
no feature, we notice nothing.
Perception is a complex thing and never as simple as
the definition of white noise implies. Listen to white

noise for a while and patterns will emerge. Look at a
blank white wall long enough and forms will appear.
Somehow we seek and find form even where there is
none. This is one of the challenges that we face in terms
of the relationship between what we perceive and what
there is.
In challenging and changing our relationship with
the world we live in, be that at the level of perception or
cognition, art has to address white noise. It is the starting
point. It is the state that shows up issues of perception in
the extreme, in the clearest way. Clarity follows from
starting with the unembellished concrete truth and
building upon it using a careful economy of means. It
most strongly supports the development of our
understanding of our relationship with the world and,
hence, our understanding of ourselves. From neutral
white noise the language development, that both
represents and enables our perceptions to evolve, can
spring. This is a core concern of art.
Noise, white or otherwise, has been a concern of
music or sound art since Luigi Russolo produced his
seminal Futurist manifesto The Art of Noises in 1913
[4]. The initial concern was to turn away from tonal
music that was, in any case, breaking down. Russolo and
the many who have followed him, including a complete
genre of noise art today, were rejecting the familiar
structures. Those structures mask direct perception with
their overlay of conventional forms to which our
perception gives a higher priority. These artists were
rejecting the regular references and relationships that
become gestalts, perceived before and over the direct
reality of the concrete sound forms presented to the
senses.
Another time-based medium has also been important
in leading to current developments. Looking back over
his work in film, Hans Richter characterised his practice
in terms of the organization of abstract forms and said
this was about “a universal language, which is what
abstract art should be about” [5]. This was not a new
position to take. Indeed, Cézanne said, “The technique of
any art consists of a language and a logic” [6].

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

3. Abstract and Concrete
As in Richter’s thinking about time, the concepts
became closely associated with abstract art, a term which
has some difficulties. Abstract normally refers to a
reduced, often symbolic, description of something. The
word abstract also received attention in mathematical
logic. Thus, for example, conventional geometry is said
to be a concrete deductive theory because it deals with
the concrete empirical entities of geometric diagrams
[7]. Formal axiomatic logic, on the other hand, is
termed abstract. Such an abstract system is purely
conceptual, represented by arbitrary symbols, and only
when interpreted in geometry, or any other physical or
tangible form, is it seen as concrete. So the abstract does
not directly relate to the physical world at all.
The art use of the word abstract is a little odd. It
seems to come from a concern with representational
figurative paintings, which might be thought of as
abstract representations of landscapes or people. By
contrast the term was applied to art that, in fact, is an
abstract of nothing at all. The movement towards
abstract art, from Cézanne, through Cubism and to
Kandinsky, Malevich and Mondrian, for example, was in
a direction of increasingly sparse or distant abstraction
from the subjects of figurative painting. Once the work
ceased to reference external reality at all, and hence
ceased to be an abstraction, the label abstract somehow,
inappropriately, stuck.
Lawrence Alloway defined useful ways of handling
the problem: “I propose to use abstract meaning to draw
out of or draw away from. Figurative paintings and
landscapes will be said to have been abstracted from
figures and landscapes. The word concrete will be used
for works of art in which a process of abstraction is not
perceptible…. I am aware of the logical objections to the
term non-figurative but … It is used here as an exclusive
term for the whole field.” [8].
Conny Dietzschold elaborates on concrete art, “this
was the area of modern art which began in Europe
around 1910, to detach itself entirely from the
reproduction of the object ... the term 'concrete' is to be
distinguished from 'abstract' - the latter denoting art
which does not relinquish its relationship to reality. …
by definition it is the autonomy of pictorial means which
constitutes Concrete Art, their insistence that the
pictorial world is a world in and of itself, founded on
surface, space, line, colour, light, light/dark contrasts and
movement.” [9].
So concrete art is concerned very directly with
reality. It is concerned with the reality of the art object
and our perception of it. This concern for the concrete in
art was not confined to painting and Richter was not the
only filmmaker interested. In discussing Vertov’s
movies, Malevich said, “ Here, … the elements are not
shackled together in a whole in order to convey the
gossip of existence … He shows the movement itself, the
dynamics whose force has been previously
overshadowed by the cigarette-holder…” [10]. In fact,
Vertov “wanted not only to demonstrate the material and

constructed nature of film, but also the reality
constructed with it.” [11].
Through challenging perception and making
concrete art that addresses the very substance of surface,
colour, movement and so on, the artist is extending our
language and hence constructing new realities. This is
exactly the concern of the White Noise book and
exhibition. Of course, not all artists like to see their work
in its historical context and new ‘movements’ sometimes
reject their predecessors. For example, Don Judd saying
in 1966, “I think everybody considered Constructivism,
Neo-Plasticism and Cubism past history by the time Bob
[Morris] and I were developing our work. Mondrian was
dead and gone…” [12]. We can see similar attitudes
today, but the truth is that current work such as that
shown and discussed in White Noise falls within a
cultural and historical context that both framed and
enabled it.

4. Interaction
Perhaps the key feature of today’s art that those
historically earlier artists who were concerned with the
concrete could not pay serious attention to, is interaction:
the observable interchange and exchange between art
systems [13] and people. The advent of digital
technology has dramatically changed this and today one
of the main concrete concerns is exactly interaction.
Because we still read books and magazines our
experience of time-based and interactive art is often
through still images and we can hence be tempted to
compare such work with earlier paintings. Nothing could
be more misleading. In interactive art, the complexity,
the key experiences, the value is surely embedded in the
interaction itself, not in still frames. That is the concrete
reality of such art. The essence, perhaps we might allow
ourselves to say the abstract in interaction, is the lean,
economically realised, process of interaction
unencumbered by “the gossip of existence”.
We can ask what white interaction would be:
nothing? Nothing that we can observe perhaps? That
may be as good a starting point as any. So we develop
the language of interaction from the null neutral case. As
with the other elements that have been mentioned, the
true interest is in the nature of the interactive experience
itself rather than in anything that it might signify.
Interaction is not material. It is experienced,
perceived, understood but we cannot touch it. It is a
somewhat difficult concrete reality to deal with, but it is
the concern of many artists today. The questions we ask
ourselves include, for example, the nature of engagement
in an interactive art system. How do we explore
engagement and its impact on our sense of ourselves and
of our relationships with the world around us? We ask
about complexity in the context of time and interchange.
We try to find what can emerge perceptually beyond and
over an interaction as specified in concrete terms. These
are examples of the questions that concrete (abstract)
digital artists are pursuing today and that we find in
White Noise.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Malevich, in his clear and important thinking about
the concerns that set the path leading to such work as
seen in White Noise said “The question of economy
became the main vantage point from which I examined
all the creations of the world of things.” [14]. Economy
is the essence.

5. Absolute_4.5 in Beta_Space
One of the early experimental works installed in
Beta_Space, an experimental exhibition space in the
Powerhouse Museum Sydney [2], was Absolute_4.5, by
the first author and sound artist Mark Fell. This is a
‘dynamic-interactive art system’. They were
commissioned to make a large interactive work for the
White Noise exhibition at the Australian Centre for the
Moving Image (ACMI), Melbourne (Edmonds and
Stubbs, 2005) and Absolute_4.5 was used as part of the
development process in the manner discussed above.
The work Absolute_4.5 is displayed on a backprojected video wall, with sound relayed over a pair of
audio monitors. It is a generative piece which is written
using Max/MSP/Jitter software running on an Apple
computer. This is a graphic programming environment
for sound, image and interaction, providing an ideal
system for exploring the correspondence between sound
and image. In this work, which is part of a series, the
artists/programmers use predefined colours and twodimensional bars specified as co-ordinates. These
correspond to synthetic sounds that occupy temporal
rather than spatial positions.
The software consists of several discreet processes.
These are grouped together into four sections, 1 – pattern
generation, 2 – sensor analysis, 3 – image display, 4 –
audio output. The sensor data modifies the pattern
generation process and, between them, a sequence of
number pairs is generated. The image display section
waits for a list of two integers, the first integer relates to
a position, and the second a colour. The audio output
again waits for the same two integers, yet here treats the
first as a position in time not space, and the second a
sound.
Given this flexibility, several different patterngenerating modules can be written which explore the
outcome of different algorithmic processes. In this case
an algorithm generates a list of 8 numbers each element
of which counts from 0 to 3. These elements are
connected in series, so that as one element reaches the
maximum value, the next one counts up 1. The outcome
of this is a series of absolutely linked color bars and a
shifting musical pattern.
Beta_Space is equipped with a grid of pressure
sensitive floor pads under the carpet in front of the
screen and these were used to detect the position of
people in the space and hence to influence the behaviour
of the work. In order to conduct the initial investigations
a simple interaction algorithm was employed. The two
key numbers that drive the work were associated with
each of the two axes of the grid (across the screen and
perpendicular to it). In crude terms, the activity of the

different aspects of the work was made to increase as
someone walked (a) towards the screen and (b) away
from the entrance to the space, i.e. to the left of the
screen. In implementation terms this was specified by
two simple numerical tables. In each case an extra value
was available to correspond to the case when no floor
pad was active: when nobody was in the space.
The range of behaviours was wide. In the least
active state several seconds could pass without any
sound or image change. In a museum context, five or ten
seconds can be quite a long time. In the most active
states, however, the sounds were intense and very busy
and the image was equally intense in very rapid, almost
flashing, changes. The question was, how to orchestrate
these shifts in relation to the floor pad sensor data in
order to obtain the greatest likelihood of engagement.
This was studied by a series of explorations with staff
and visitors to the Powerhouse. Observation and posthoc interviews were used and they alone provided
sufficient feedback for considerable progress to be made
in the development of Absolute_4.5.
The question of attractors was quite interesting from
the start. The initial decision was to make the null state
(no presence detected) very busy and to almost stop the
work as soon as someone ventured into the space. The
attraction power was, in this way, very strong. However,
from the wider perspective of the museum it was too
much. The attraction power of this exhibit had to be
balanced with the attraction power of other exhibits
within its context. So, during the installation process, a
careful exploration of the options was made and a busy,
but not frenetic, rest state was determined.
The extreme slowing of the work on entry to the
space was a clearly positive initial sustainer. It caught the
attention and caused a certain puzzlement about what
next. The initial transformation along each axis was
linear. It turned out that this meant that the exciting
behaviour (particularly the frenetic sound) was only
reached gradually and the tentative visitor often never
evoked it at all. The solution was to replace the linear
functions by an inverse exponential one. This did the
trick. Once this change was made another sustainer
factor was able to come into play more successfully. On
one axis, perpendicular to the screen, a reasonably
obvious change in speed was apparent. On the other axis,
however, a more subtle change in the image patters
emerged. Thus the audience had something that they
could readily grasp together with something rather
difficult to pin down. This two pronged approach seems
to be a valuable one in creating sustainers.

6. Absolute_5 in White Noise at ACMI
Absolute_5, the ACMI commissioned work for its
White Noise exhibition, occupies a much larger
environment than Absolute_4.5 and, in certain respects
uses different technology. It is operated by a network of
four Apple computers. It also uses a single large
projection screen, but instead of floor-pads, the sensors
consist of three cameras and image analysis systems. The

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

sound has been extended to eight channels which are
realized through eight suspended speakers that form a
space in front of the screen. Two of the cameras analyze
the movement pf people in this space in terms of simple
general parameters such as the total amount of
movement. The third camera covers the entrance to the
space and is used to trigger a direct response as people
arrive at the work and hence provide the attractor. The
lessons of Absolute_4.5 are applied in the context of its
‘beta-testing’ in order to ensure the quality of the final
work. This is a specific process that illustrates the
importance of the approach for interactive art systems.

relaters, it seems likely that an evolving behaviour can be
positive: however, we need to explore this issue much
more before we can begin to articulate a clear set of
principles.

Figure 4. Absolute_5 looking up to the screen

Figure 3. Absolute_5 from outside the space, showing
speakers
Absolute_4.5, in itself, did not tackle the issue of
relaters beyond its intrinsic interest. However, initial
experiments are underway in two respects. Firstly, as
mentioned above, arranging for the work to ‘learn’ or
modify its behaviour as a result of experience is under
investigation. Secondly, a networked approach that
connects Absolute_4.5 to Absolute_5. The method is to
have each of the two remote works influence one
parameter of the other. Thus, the activities of the
audience in Melbourne can change the colour space
employed in the work in Sydney in real time. This
investigation is around the concept of an interactive
experience that is different in some way each time that it
is entered into. The changes are not random, although
perhaps they might be thought to be, but are influenced
deterministically by people out of sight in another city.
From these studies we begin to see some approaches
being developed that can elaborate our model and
provide set of principles for building successful
attractors, sustainers and retainers in public interactive
experiences. The initial power of attraction is a question
of appropriate differentiation from the context, so not an
intrinsic property of the work itself. The holding power,
on the other hand, is very much to do with the
behavioural patters of the work and it has been suggested
that a combination of easy to grasp patterns and slightly
obscure ones is the basis of the way forward. For

Figure 5. Absolute_5 looking up to the screen

Figure 6. Absolute_5 looking up to the screen

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

7. Conclusion

References

The paper has discussed an important current
problem in the area of interactive experience design and
described an approach that is being taken to address it.
The approach is to extend the Studio as Laboratory
concept by taking the experimental studio into a public
space and, hence, enhance the creative process of
developing such systems by enabling explorations with
real audiences involving themselves with the works in
realistic contexts.
Experiences with the development of an interactive
artwork using the approach were described and the
model illustrated in terms of the key issue of the
audience’s creative engagement with such works. It is
proposed that this approach can offer a realistic and
viable method for conducting research into the difficult
and rather elusive problem of designing for creative
audience engagement with interactive art systems.

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

Acknowledgements

[8]

The author is extremely grateful to the team who
enabled, constructed and realized Beta_Space: not least,
Lizzie Muller, Matthew Connell, Alastair Weakley and
Greg Turner. Shigeki Amitani and Brigid Costello have
made very valuable contributions to the evaluation work
and Mark Fell has been a crucial partner in the making of
Absolute_4,5 and its related works. Linda Candy has
made valuable comments on much of the work and on
this paper. This research/work was [partly] conducted
within the Australasian CRC for Interaction Design,
which is established and supported under the Australian
Government’s Cooperative Research Centres
Programme.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Edmonds, E. A. and Stubbs, M. (editors). 2005. White
Noise. ACMI, Melbourne Australia.
Edmonds, E. A. and Muler, L. On Creative Engagement.
Visual Communications 5, to appear.
Edmonds, E. A. 2005. On New Constructs in Art. Artists
Bookworks, Sussex, UK.
Russolo, L. The Art of Noises. Translated by Barclay
Brown. Pendragon, Press Monographs in Musicology
Series No. 6 Hillsdale, NY. 1987.
Foster, S. C. (editor) Hans Richter: Activism, Modernism
and the Avant-Garde, MIT Press, Cambrige, MA. 1998,
p172.
Léo Larguier published this quotation “collected by
Cézanne’s son without adding one line of my own.”
Printed in English translation in Conversations with
Cézanne, edited by Michael Doran, University of
California Press, 2001, p17.
Blanché, R. Axiomatics, (translated by Keene, G. B.)
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1962.
Alloway, L. Nine Abstract Artists. Tiranti, London,
1954.
Dietzschold, C. Opening Speech: M i n i m a l
Approach…Concrete Tendancies. Tin Sheds Gallery,
University of Sydney, April 2005.
Malevich, M. Pictorial Laws in Cinematic Problems. In
Bulgakowa, O (ed) Kazimir Malevich: The White
Rectangle, Writings on Film. Potemkin Press, San
Francisco, CA, 2002. Pp 77-84.
Weibel, P. Eisenstein, Vertov and the Formal Film. In
Film as Film, Hayward Gallery, London, 1979. Pp 4751.
Jewish Museum, Primary Structures Symposium
Transcript, Archives of American Art, Smithsonian
Institution, 1966.
Cornock, S. and Edmonds, E. A. “The creative process
where the artist is amplified or superseded by the
computer”. Leonardo, 16, 1973, pp 11-16.
Malevich, K. Suprematism . 34 Drawings, Vitebsk, 1920.
translation taken from Druit, M. (ed). Kazimir Malevich:
Suprematism. Guggenheim Museum, New York, 2003.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

