Handwritten Signature Verification Using Image Invariants and Dynamic Features
Abdullah I. Al-Shoshan
Computer Science Department, Qassim University
P.O Box 1928, Unaizah 51911, Saudi Arabia
{E-mail: shoshan@myway.com}
Abstract
In this paper, a development of automatic signature
classification system is proposed. We have presented offline and online signature verification system, based on
the signature invariants and its dynamic features. The
proposed system segments each signature based on its
perceptually important points and then, for each
segment, computes a number of features that are scale,
rotation and displacement invariant. The normalized
moments and the normalized Fourier descriptors are
used for this invariancy, while the speed of pen is used as
a dynamic feature of the signature. In both cases the data
acquisition, pre-processing, feature extraction and
comparison steps are analyzed and discussed. Both static
and dynamic features were used as an input to a neural
network. The neural network used for classification is a
multi-layer perception (MLP) with one input layer, one
hidden layer and one output layer. The performance of
the proposed system is presented through simulation
examples.

1. Introduction
A biometric can be classified as physiological or
behavioral. Physiological biometrics measures some
physical feature of the subject such as face, fingerprint,
iris, and hand and finger geometry [1, 2]. Behavioral
biometrics measures a user action, such as speaking,
writing and walking. Most physical features remain
relatively stable over time, while behavioral
characteristics are in control of the subject and tend to
change over the short and long terms due to health,
physiological state and aging. Further, the subject can
often create false negatives, hiding their true identity by
consciously changing the behavior being measured. This
implies that behavioral biometrics must be collected
from a cooperative or unaware subject. While
physiological biometrics may be adequately represented
by a single sample, behavioral biometric generally
requires several samples due to their inherent variability.
Signatures vary depending on fatigue, mental and
physical state, and writing position.

Signature verification is of particular importance as
it is the only widely accepted method for endorsing
financial transactions. An important advantage of the
signature over other biometric is its long standing
tradition in many commonly encountered verification
tasks [3-5]. It has been used for decades in civilian
applications while other methods (e.g., fingerprints) still
have the stigma of being associated with criminal
investigation. In other words, signature verification is
already accepted by the general public. Experiments
investigating the effects of packet loss for two online
signature verification systems distributed over the
Internet were explored in [6].
Handwritten signature verification can be divided
into on-line (or dynamic) and off-line (or static)
verification [7-10]. On-line verification refers to a
process where the signer uses a special pen called a
stylus to create his signature that produces measurements
such as pen location, speed, and pressure. Off-line
verification is concerned with the verification of a
signature made by a normal pen. Various different
approaches to both classes have been proposed.
Automatic signature verification takes into account the
intrinsic variability of a signature according to country,
age, time, habits, psychological or mental state, physical
conditions and practical signing conditions constitute the
major challenge for any system designer. In this paper
we will focus on a subset of these techniques, those
employing the idea of human signature to match image
patterns. The notion of matched spatial filter (MSF) is a
venerable one with a long history [11, 12]. While by
itself it cannot account for invariant recognition, it can be
coupled to invariant mappings or signal expansions, and
is therefore able to provide invariance to rotation and
scaling in the image plane.

2. Features Extraction
2.1 Static Features
When processing a signature after a person has signed it,
we can only extract its static features by looking at it as
an image. Dealing with the signature as an image, we can

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

use some of the image processing tools. In this paper, we
have considered the normalized Fourier descriptors and
the normalized central moment's theories.
2.1.1 Fourier Descriptor (FD)
The Fourier descriptor is a method of describing the
shape of a closed, planar figure. Given a figure in the
complex plane, the contour can be traced yielding a one
dimensional complex function of time. If the contour is
traced repeatedly, the periodic function that results can
be expressed in a Fourier series. The Fourier descriptor
of a contour is defined as this series. If the complex
function representing the contour is x(n), then A(k) is the
FD of this expressed as follows:

1
A(k ) =
N

N −1

¦ x(n)e

§ j 2ukπ ·
¨
¸
© N ¹

(1)

u =0

To make the FD invariant to scale, transition
and orientation, this is called normalizing the Fourier
descriptor. So the Normalized Fourier Descriptor is the
FD of a contour such that it has a standard size,
orientation and starting point.
The NFD is calculated by a procedure obtained
by Timothy Wallace and Paul Wintz [13]. Referring to
reference [13], this procedure is built on an assumption
that the contour does not cross itself and it is traced
counter clockwise. Therefore, A(1) will be always the
largest coefficient in magnitude. But in the case of
signature, the complex function is not a closed contour
and it may cross itself and it should not traced CCW. So,
we have to find the first largest coefficient, which we
will call it the first largest magnitude (flm). So, we have
to find the flm and have the equation:

m = k − flm

(2)

Multiply A(i) by
j [(i − k )u + ( flm − i )v ] / ( k − flm )

e

then by

e j (i − flm )2π

m [k ]

we get the NFD of the signature.
2.1.2 Normalized Central Moment
Moments are a descriptive technique with an intuitive
basis in the study of the mechanics of bodies. The initial
approach is usually credited to Hu [14]. Teague
discussed the concept of orthogonal moment sets and
showed how the concept of Hu’s moment invariant may
be extended to higher-order moments. Other work has
shown that both the moment of the binary silhouette and
gray-valued image segment may be used together for
classification. Furthermore, the two-dimensional moment
may be used to obtain moments of projections through
the image segment, which may be used in classification
schemes. For a 2-D discrete function f(x,y), the moment,
mpq, of order (p+q) is defined as [11, 14]:

m pq = ¦¦ x p y q f ( x, y )
x

(3)

y

for p,q = 0, 1, 2, … To make the moments invariant to
position transformation, we have to calculate the
moments with respect to the image centroid instead of
the origin (0,0). This is called the central moments and
defined as:

μ pq = ¦ ¦ ( x − x ) p ( y − y ) q f ( x, y )
x

(4)

y

where

x=

m10
m00

and

y=

m01
m00

(5)

Although the above moments are invariant to scale,
rotation and transition, they are not invariant to partially
translating, rotating or scaling a part of the image while
keeping the rest of the image without change. Also,
image scaling ratio must be the same with respect to the
x and the y directions. In the signature classification
system, the signatures are not guaranteed to be scaled
with same ratio because the signer may enlarge his
signature in one direction but not the other. Therefore,
input size normalization will be considered an important
issue. The invariant moments also suffer from another
problem; as we increase the moments order, their values
become smaller and smaller.

2.2 Dynamic Features
When a person signs on paper, he leaves a static image
of his signature. Forgers practice the art of reproducing
the image (or shape) of a signature, with little regard to
the motions that caused the image. Pen motions are
ephemeral and are not captured on the paper. When a
signature is captured with a digitizer, the pen motions
(dynamics) are recorded. When signing, the hand can
operate in a regime known as ballistic motion, where the
muscles are not controlled by sensory feedback. Ballistic
motions are generally rapid, practiced motions whose
accuracy increases with speed [1]. In the on-line
signature there is an important feature that can be
extracted, which is the speed of the signature. During the
signing process, the speed of the pen ball is changing at
every point of the signature. These changes are repeated
in a fixed way every time a person signs again. To find
out the speed of the signature we have to record the time
at which a specific point is sampled. Through a visual
basic program we recorded the coordinate and the time
of each point of the signature and then we calculated the
speed of the signature as
Speed = Distance / Time

(6)

3 Artificial Neural Networks
One of the applications of pattern classification (PC)
using ANN is signatures classification [15, 16].
Signature classification using ANN can be done in two

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

approaches. One is by using the structural analysis of the
signature as number of loops and the length of the
vertical and horizontal lines and such other features. The
other approach is by using the global feature of the
signature as invariant moments, normalized Fourier
descriptor, and speed of the signature. Template
matching is extensively used in low-level vision tasks to
localize and identify patterns in images. Two methods
are commonly used: (1) image subtraction, (2)
correlation [17]. When the images are normalized to
have zero average and unit norm, the two approaches
give the same result. The usual implementation of the
above methods relies on the Euclidean distance. Other
distances can be used and some of them have better
properties such as increasing robustness to noise and
minor deformations [18]. One of the reasons for which
template matching by correlation is commonly used is
that correlation can be shown to be the optimal
(according to a particular criterion) linear operation by
which a deterministic reference function can be extracted
from additive white Gaussian noise [17]. Several
performance metrics are available for correlation filters
that describe attributes of the correlation plane. The
signal to noise ratio (SNR) is just one of them. Other
useful quantities are the peak-to-correlation energy, the
location of the correlation peak and the invariance to
distortion. As correlation is typically used to locate and
discriminate objects, another important measure of a
filter's performance is how well it discriminates between
different classes of objects [12, 19]. The classifier which
minimizes the probability of error is the Bayes classifier.
The neural network used for classification is a multilayer perception (MLP) with one input layer and one
hidden layer and one output layer. An MLP is believed to
have generalization capability, that is, it can produce
correct (or nearly correct) output for input not used
during training and it can overcome the small differences
between the input patterns [20, 21]. In the MLP each
node may use the thresholding function sigmoid, tanh or
any other suitable function. In this project, the tanh
function is used. The error function used in the MLP is
the sum of square error. The learning algorithm used
with the MLP is the back-propagation algorithm. The
back-propagation algorithm is a gradient descent method
to minimize the square error cost function.

4. Examples
Identification answers the question “who are you”, while
verification answers the questions “are you who you
claim to be”. Identification is a 1:N match, which can be
quite difficult when N is in the millions, for example
potential shoppers at a large retailer. Verification is a
much more tractable problem, requiring a 1:1 match,
based on a reference biometric retrieved by an
identification claim (typically from the user) [1]. To
generate the signatures database, the shape and speed of
each signature is recorded using a pen tablet and we have
used the features: speed, NFD, and NCM as the inputs to
the ANN. We used the Delta-Bar-Delta technique. To

evaluate the speed of the signature we have to record the
time at which a specific point is sampled, and equation
(6) has been used. Fig. 1 shows an example the speeds of
two signatures.

Figure 1: The average speed of two
signatures.
A collection of 100 persons, with 10 realizations
each, has been selected, which are divided into two sets:
500 samples for training and the rest are used for testing.
The length of a signature may vary from time to time.
Therefore, the length of the signature and speed vector
should be normalized for every signature in one category
so we can compare them. After normalizing the length of
the signatures, we calculate the largest error between the
recorded signature and the average. This error will be our
measurement boundary. If the error of the new signature
is greater than a threshold, it will be rejected.
Using the NCM, image scaling ratio must be the
same. We used the recorded signature and compare it
with our database library, depending on the signature
points, speed and NFD. One of the main problems in the
NCM is its inability to be invariant to local variations in
the signature. These signatures are generated using a pen
tablet and fed to the computer as points consisting of x
and y-position and time. The results of using each feature
independently are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Results of Using Each
Descriptor with the ANN.
Features
% Correct
% Error
Speed
90 %
10 %
NFD
92 %
8%
NCM
83 %
17%
Combining the three features, we get the results
shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Results of using all descriptors
with the ANN.
Features
# of iterations
% Error
Speed, NFD, NCM
103
0%
The reason behind this high performance is the
combination of the features. By tying down the

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

threshold, the verification error in each feature is
minimized by the other one. For example, the 17 % error
when using only the NCM is classified correctly by the
ANN when using the speed or the NFD features.

[9]

4. Conclusions

[10]

In this paper, a dynamic signature verification
system to meet the needs of the retail sector has been
developed. The proposed system segments each
signature based on its perceptually important points and
then computes for each segment a number of features
that are scale, rotation and displacement invariant. The
normalized moments and the normalized Fourier
descriptors are used for this invariance, while the
signature speed was used to catch the signature
dynamics. The proposed method produced a 0% error
rate when using combining the speed, the NCM and the
NFD in the ANN.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

T. G. Zimmerman, G. F. Russell, A. Heilper, B.
A. Smith, J. Hu, D. Markman, J. E. Graham, C.
Drews, Retail Applications of Signature
Verification, Proceedings of SPIE2004, Volume
5404, Biometric Technology for Human
Identification, Anil K. Jain, Nalini K. Ratha,
Editors, 206-214, August 2004.
R. Kashi, J. Hu, W. Nelson, W. Turin, A Hidden
Markov Model approach to online handwritten
signature verification, International Journal on
Document Analysis and Recognition, 1, 102-109,
1998.
M. Turk and A. Pentland, Eigenfaces for
recognition, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
3(1), 71-86, 1991.
L. L. Lee, T. Berger, and E. Aviczer, Reliable OnLine Human Signature Verification Systems,
IEEE Trans. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Intelligence, 18(6), 643-647, 1996.
3L. Yang, B. Widjaja, R. Prasad, Application of
hidden markov models for signature verification,
Pattern Recognition, 28(2), 161–170, 1995.
J. Richiardi, J. Fierrez-Aguilar, J. Ortega-Garcia,
A. Drygajlo, On-Line Signature Verification
Resilience to Packet Loss in IP Networks, Proc.
2nd COST 275 Workshop on Biometrics on the
Internet:
fundamentals,
advances
and
applications, 9-14, 2004.
J. J. Brault and R. Plamondon, Segmenting
handwritten signatures at their perceptually
important points, IEEE transaction on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 15, 953-957,
1993.
R. Plamondon and S. N. Srihari, On-line and Offline Handwriting Recognition: A Comprehensive
Survey, IEEE Trans. Pattern Recognition and
Machine Intelligence, 22(1), 63-84, January 2000.

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

S. N. Srihari, A. Xu, and M. K. Kalera, Learning
Strategies and Classification Methods for OffLine Signature Verification, 9th Int. Workshop on
Frontiers
in
Handwriting
Recognition
(IWFHR’04), 161-166, 2004.
B. Yanikoglu and A. Kholmatov, An improved
decision
criterion
for
genuine/forgery
classification in on-line signature verification,
Online-Sig-ICANN2003, 1-4, 2003.
Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods,
Digital image processing, Addison-Wesley, 1993.
D. Casasent and G. Ravichandran, Advanced
distortion-invariant minimum average corelation
energy (MACE) filters, Applied Optics, 31(8),
1109-1116, 1992.
Timothy P. Wallace and Paul A. Wintz, An
Efficient Three-Dimension Aircraft Recognition
Algorithm Using Normalized Fourier Descriptors,
Computer Graphics and Image Processing, 13,
99-126, 1980.
M. K. Hu, Visual Pattern Recognition by Moment
Invariants, IRE Trans. Info. Theory, IT-8, 179187, 1962.
Benyamin Matityaho and Miriam Furst, Neural
Network Based Model for Classification of Music
Type, IEEE Cat., 95, 640-645, 1995.
P. Mautner, V. Matoušek, T. Maršálek, and M.
Šoule, Using Self-organizing Feature Map for
Signature
Verification,
(451)
Artificial
Intelligence and Soft Computing, 129, 2004.
K. Fukunaga, Introduction to statistical pattern
recognition, Academic Press, 1990.
S. I. Sudharsanan, A. Mahalanobis, and M. K.
Sundareshan, Unified framework for the synthesis
of synthetic discriminant functions with reduced
noise variance and sharp correlation structure,
Optical Engineering, 29(9), 1021-1028, 1990.
J. Ben-Arie and K. R. Rao, On the Recognition of
Occluded Shapes and Generic Faces Using
Multiple
Template
Expansion
Matching,
CVPR93., 1, 214-219, 1993.
T. Shuttleworth and R. Wilson, A Neural Network
for Triad Classification, Proceedings of the
International Computer Music Conference, San
Francisco, 1, 428-431, 1995.
J. Bromley, J. Bentz, L. Bottou, I. Guyon, Y. L.
Cun, C. Moore, E. Sackinger, and R. Shah,
Signature verification using a siamese time delay
neural network, International Journal of Pattern
Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, 7(4), 669–
688, 1998.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

