3D-Visualization Techniques, including Samples and Applications
Walter Schuhr
University of Applied Sciences
Magdeburg (Germany),
professor@post.com

Erich Kanngieser
HarbourCity University (HCU)
Hamburg(Germany)
geomatik@rzcn.haw-hamburg.de

Abstract

object recording and documentation, as well as
for interpretation and application purposes. It shall
convince not only professionals but also amateurs, to
prefer 3D photography instead of still sticking to
common 2D snapshots.
In the beginning, samples of masterpieces of rare
international historic stereoviews as well as samples of
forensic 3D-photography shall initially give an idea
of its brilliance, of its outstanding documentary value
and of its broad range of applications: As a homage to
the CGIV 06 Conference in Sydney, Australia, Figure
1 shows a Masterpiece of a historic stereo view of the
South head cliffs (New South Wales) from
approximately 1910, presented in the DOWN UNDER
mode, see [1].

This paper deals with new aspects of 3Dvisualization Techniques as state-of-the-art tools for
recording, documentation, interpretation etc..
To give an idea of the outstanding documentary value
of 3D-images and of its broad range of applications,
masterpieces for stereoviews and for forensic 3Dphotography are initially presented (see the
authors`RecorDIM -website 3dsite.icomos.org)..
Since these samples represent huge stereoviewcollections, this paper also deals with international
3D-image- archives.
First time gaining “3D-niche-photography” based on
a telescope-rod-Lite-platform is introduced.
In the following are highlighted advantages for the
practical use of stereoviews, e. g.,,
- the still underestimated effect of gaining a
complete additional dimension and
- advantages of 3D-visualization for the
enhancement of spatial structures, as well as
- pointing to the extremely high detail
resolution and to
- the probative force of forensic 3Dphotography.
Finally a new way to derive terrain-heights from
image-parallax-values
is
shown
for
aerial
photography and for SAR-imagery, as well as a
completed
list
of
virtual
3D-visualizationmethodology, including “Down-Under”and FelixSolid-State type 3D-screens to replace the 2D-PC(screen).
Keywords: Geo-Visualization, 3D-SAR, 3D-nichephoto-graphy, 3D rod camera Lite, Mathematical 3DModel

1. Introduction
This paper deals with new aspects of 3Dvisualization Techniques as state-of-the-art tools for

Figure 1: Masterpiece of a historic stereo view of the
South head cliffs presented in the DOWN UNDER
mode! (view the left image with your left eye directly
and the right image with your right eye in a “horizontal
mirror”)

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

The Menhir of the so called Alignments of Carnac
(France) in Figure 2 is imaged on a typically
stereoview to be used for high resolution 3D
documentation in rock arts. This heritage stereoview
currently has been taken by the authors under
“expedition constraints” with a single lens camera, to
be viewed with a vertical mirror.

The archive of the California Museum of Photography/University of California Riverside (CMP/
UCR), which contains the famous Keystone-Mast
collection as well as the Underwood&Underwood staff
etc., with a total of approximately 350 000 analogue
stereoviews, showing a 10% digitization rate, doubtless
is the most important international stereoview archive.
The HAN 3D archive in Seoul (South Korea) is
another sample of a very important archive for unique
specimen of National stereoviews. Figure 4 gives an
impression of Authors` visit to the HAN 3D archive,
where a stereo Video camera was proudly presented.

Figure 2: Current rock arts Masterpiece in 3D
(Carnac, France) presented in the PIGEON mode (!),
see Table 2
The stereoview in Figure 3 represents forensic 3D
photography, which still promises a great future. This
sample in the field of Spatial Monitoring in Civil
Engineering testimonies the progress of the
construction works of a shopping Center in the town of
Magdeburg (Germany).

Figure 4: At the HAN 3D archive in Seoul (South
Korea)
To maintain the list of archives of 3D-photography, the
authors ask the international community, to receive
information under the mentioned email address.

3. Gaining 3D-niche-photography

Figure 3: A sample stereoview of forensic importance:
Documentation of the stage of the construction works
of a shopping Center in Magdeburg (Germany).

2. International
photography

Archives

for

3D

The samples in chapter 1 represent huge
collections of international Stereoviews. Historic 3Dimages in particular are a key to the spatial past, a real
treasure, still waiting for a rediscovery [2]!
However, due to different reasons, like restrictions by
the owners, critical conditions of the analogue originals
etc., often there is no or only limited access to archives
of stereoviews, compare [3].

It is the authors’ concern, for documentation
purposes, to the greatest possible extend, consequently
to replace subjective manual sketches by objective
(3D-) photography. A comparative sample of an
excavation site in Fig. 5, due to the superior of
photographic documentation (right) clearly indicates,
avoiding manual sketches (left) is most overdue.
To tackle this task, first time extremely high resolution
low altitude aerial (3D-) photography from a 15m
carbon telescope-rod (see Fig. 6) and from a captive
balloon successfully has been applied and will more
and more become an objective tool for a huge range of
documentation purposes, in particular in archaeology,
see Figure 7. Depending on the height, the base length
for the light digital SONY Cyber Shot cameras
showing 5 Mega pixels and remote control has been
varied. This “3D-niche-photography”is also well
suited under expedition constraints and promises a
great future.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

As a matter of fact, in many cases Cultural Heritage
stereoviews can be obtained with single lens cameras.
It is highly recommended, to take a sequence of stereo
mates with different baselines, to decide for the
optimum stereo model afterwards, instead of believing
in the calculation of just one optimum base length,
which might produce disappointing results regarding
the expectations of the spatial perception.

4. Practical Applications of Stereoviews
Figure 5: A comparative sample of an excavation site
(Patara,Turkey) clearly indicates the superior of the
photo-graphic documentation (right) over a manual
sketch (left)

There is no doubt, 3D-visualization Techniques
become state-of-the-art tools for
recording,
documentation and interpretation purposes etc..
The enumeration of the long list of possible
applications of stereoviews in the areas of Arts and
Science,
Engineering,
Economy,
Information
Technology, in the social as well as in the daily life
would already exceed this paper. Therefore in the
following are highlighted some practical aspects of
3D image applications:
Figure 8 represents the still underestimated effect of
gaining a complete additional dimension from using
advanced 3D- instead of traditional 2D-Photography.

Figure 6: Dipl.-Eng.mult.K.Silz taking ground based
low range aerial photography in 3D, using a digital
camera (top right) with remote control (bottom right)
from a 10m rod (left).
Fig. 8 The escutcheon of Buckingham Palace (London,
UK) ; compare 2D and 3D.
3D imagery show particular advantages for the visual
enhancement of spatial structures (e.g., relief enhancement), see Figure 9 and 10.

Figure 7: Sample for a low altitude stereo pair to
replace out of date manual sketches (captive balloon
3D view of the Ecclesiasterion in Patara, Turkey;
carried out by Dipl.-Eng. St. Kiel)

Figure 9: 3D view enhancing the spatial structures of
a carved stone of the antique theatre of Tlos (Turkey),

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

The stereoview of a carved stone of the antique theatre
in Tlos (Turkey) in Figure 9 is a sample, which, due to
a proper choice of the base-to-distance ratio (here of
about 1:2) clearly enhances near plan structures.
Figure 10 shows a sample of stereo mates, to enhance
spatial structures of a natural site, here of the well
known “Elephant of Guilin” (China). The sample in

Figure 12: 3D-Monitoring of a bridge construction
over the Middleland-Channel (Hannover, Germany)

Figure 10: Stereoview of the “Elephant of Guilin”
(China)
Figure 9 also indicates the extremely high geometric
and radiometric detail resolution of about 1mm pixel
size and even better(!), which so far is superior to any
other 3D medium range surveying method, including
3D Laser scanners.
The combination of the left image of a stereo model
from 1978 with a recent right image in Figure 11
stands for using Steroviews for Change Detection
purposes.

Figure 11 Multitemporal stereoviews for Change
Detection purposes near the Monument of Otto v.
Guericke (Magdeburg, Germany)
In the following Figures 12, 13 and 14 show
stereoviews in the field of Civil Engineering,
representing the probative force of forensic 3Dphotography:

Fig. 13 Ground based low aerial 3D photography to
document pilotages

Figure 14: 3D photography of a forensic experiment in
Civil Engineering, indicating the ineffectiveness of a
particular defogger device

Also part of this chapter is the approximate(!) basic
calculation of terrain heights from image parallax
values, which here first time is derived from (multiple)
calculations of height displacements for single
conventional aerial photography and for SAR images
in the object(!) space (see Fig. 15, 16 and Table 1):

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Finally, within the application part of this paper, in
Table 2 a first complete synopsis of virtual 3Dvisualization methods is presented, including the
“Down-Under”mode and the Felix Technology,
compare [4], [5] and [6].
Figure 15: Height displacements for single images in
the object(!) space for conventional aerial photography
showing normal case (left part) and for SAR ground
range imagery (right part)
Table 1: Approximate basic formulas for the
calculation of terrain heights ǻh for conventional 3D
aerial photography and for overlapping SAR imagery
here first time are derived from (multiple) calculation
of height displacements of single(!) images in the
object(!) space
Aerial photography
SAR image (ground

Table 2: The Complete list of Virtual Spatial
Visualization Techniques (Status: July 2006)
1. 3D visualization of in minimum two overlapping stereo mates, vertical or horizontal
arranged, but “projected without contact”;
for "ortho" or "pseudo" as well as for normal
and/or cross 3D visualization:
1.1 Autostereoscopic view of horizontal
mounted 3D views, see Fig. 3, 7 – 14 and 16
1.2 MAGIC EYE / random dot
1.3 CYBER SPACE
1.4 Stereoscopes:
1.4.1 Lens Stereoscopes
1.4.2 Mirror Stereoscopes with lenses
1.4.3 Mirror Stereoscopes without lenses;
vertical Mirror: PIGEON, see Fig. 2
1.4.4 Mirror Stereoscopes without lenses;
horizontal Mirror: DOWN UNDER, see Fig. 1
1.4.5 Prism-Stereoscopes for horizontal
mounted stereomates
1.4.6
Prism-Stereoscopes
for
vertical
arranged stereomates: KMQ
1.4.7 Prism-Stereoscopes for vertical
interlaced stereomates:
LENTICULAR LENSES (“3D postcards”)

(normal case!):
single image
radial displacements ǻr:
(in object space!):
ǻr / ǻh § r / h
(see Table: )
ǻr §(r/h) * ǻh
from single image
radial displacements ǻr to
component height
displacements in
(3D) images 1 &2:

range !):
single SAR image
Radar parallaxes
ǻY:
(in object space!):
ǻY / ǻh § h / Y
(see Table: )
ǻY § (h/Y) * ǻh
from Radar
parallaxes ǻY for
single SAR images
to height
displacements in
(3D) images 1 &2:

ǻX1 §( X1/ h)*ǻh
ǻX2 §( X2/ h) * ǻh
px § ǻX2 - ǻX1 (!)
with X2§X1+base b

ǻY1 §( h/ Y1)*ǻh
ǻY2 §( h/ Y2)*ǻh
ǻp=py§ǻY1 – ǻY2(!)
with Y2§Y1+b§Y+b

px§
(((X1+b)-X1)/h) *ǻh

ǻp§
((h/Y)-(h/(Y+b)))*ǻh

ǻh § (h/b)
* [px ]
from object to
image space with

ǻh §(1/(h*b))
*[Y*(Y+b)*ǻp ]
from object to
image space with

c § focal length

k §quasi“focal length”

px / px’ § h / c

ǻp / ǻp’ § h / k

with px’=horizontal
parallax

withǻp’=SAR model
parallax

2.1 ANAGLYPHS (complementary color
(green/red
or
blue(magenta)/red
or
magenta/yellow separation)
2.2 CROMADEPTHS(spectral color
separation)
2.3 POLARIZING FILTER Techniques
2.4 (Liquid Crystal-) SHUTTER glasses
2.5 NUOPTICS(PULFRICH):3D(-TV)
for(relative) moving objects through“one-eye
sunglasses”

px § [(h/c) * px’]

ǻp § [ (h/k) * ǻp’]

follows the approx.
parallax formula for
aerial photography:
ǻh§ (h/b)*
(h/c)* [px’]

follows the approx.
parallax formula for
SAR models:
ǻh§(1/(h*b))*
(h/k) *[ǻp’*(Y*(Y+b) ]

3. Methods using VlRTUAL 3D MODELS:

2.Methods for the virtual spatial visualization
Technology based on stereo mates,
“projected in contact”, using alternate
projection and/or different color:

(3.1 Mirror)
3.2 (FELIX 3D-) Rotating Screen
3.3 (FELIX 3D-) SOLID STATE
3.4 HOLOGRAM Technologies

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 16 SAR ground range stereomodel
(Kalimantan, Indonesia) (courtesy BAKOSURTANAL
Indonesia)
The Felix Solid State type 3D-screen even seems to be
a candidate to replace the 2D-PC(-screen) generation in
the next future, at least partly, see also [5].

5. Conclusions
Summarizing, the popularity of 3D-Visualization
Techniques, including samples and applications, still is
not in coincidence with its importance [7]. Though the
progress in the field of 3D Technology recently
increased enormously, there are still gaps for important
practical as well as for research work, like, e.g.,
- to convince amateurs and professionals of the still
underestimated effect in gaining a complete additional
dimension. Beside others this holds for the
enhancement of spatial structures by suited 3Dvisualization Techniques, as well as for the
achievement of extremely high detail resolution and for
the probative force of forensic 3D-photography etc..
Though amateurs and professionals can gain own
stereoviews even with single lens cameras, the 3D
photography still is not very common and should be
increasingly promoted:
- A survey for a systematic listing of existing
international archives for stereo views, including the
archives contents and access is highly recommended.
- A Peer reviewed and definitely complete synopsis of
the virtual 3D-visualization Technologies with
sufficient information content is still missing! Already
from first systematic steps in this field the “DOWN
UNDER” 3D-visualization method recently has been
invented, by the authors, see Fig. 1 and Table2.
- The authors appeal again to the professional
community, to replace manual sketches for
documentation purposes at least by 2D-, preferable by
3D-photography!

- Intense dealing with “3D-niche-photography” based
on telescope-rod and/or captive-balloon promises a
great future.
- Receipts and samples for gaining, processing and
applying stereoviews are still required for different
disciplines.
- There is still a gap for operational “stereoview
adopted software” [8].
It is liked to emphasize, the authors, who chair the
RecorDIM task Group on “Collecting, Compiling and
Sharing International Heritage stereoviews”, maintain
the non-commercial website 3dsite.icomos.org, which
is also prepared for contacts and cooperation, see [5].
Finally, to emphasize the great future potential of the
3D Technology it is expected, the FELIX Solid state
type 3D screen is a real candidate to replace the current
2D PC-screen generation, at least partly.

6. References
[1] W.Schuhr and E. Kanngieser, “3D Geo-Imagery Bridging
the Continents“, ISPRS Comm. V Proceedings, ISPRSKongress Istanbul (Turkey) , 2004.
[2] H. and A. Gernsheim, A Concise History of Photography,
Publisher: Crosset & Dunlap, New York, (USA), 1965.
[3] J. Waldsmith, Stereo Views, Krause Publications; Library
of Congress Catalog Number 2001099523, 2nd edition, Iola,
Wisconsin (USA), 2002.
[4] W.Schuhr and E. Kanngieser, International Stereoviews
to save the World’s Cultural Heritage, CIPA Symposium
Proceedings, Turin (Italy) 2005.
[5] W.Schuhr and E. Kanngieser, 3D Visualization
Techniques- the Complete List - ISPRS Comm. V
Symposium Proceedings, Corfu (Greece), 2002.
[6] W.Schuhr and E. Kanngieser, Basics of Spatial Data
Visualization. SDH 2000 Symposium Proceedings, Beijing
(China), 2000.
[7] W.Schuhr and E. Kanngieser, “Back to the Roots in
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and GIS”, ISPRSArchives Amsterdam (NL), 2000.
[8] P. Waldhaeusl and C. Ogleby, “3-by-3 Rules for Simple
Photogrammetrie”,
ISPRS
Comm.V
Symposium
Proceedings, Melbourne, (Australia), 1994.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

