Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling: Art or What?
Erdal Devrim Aydın, Togan Tong, S. Emre Pusat
Faculty of Architecture, Yıldız Technical University, Turkey
{eaydin@yildiz.edu.tr, ttong@yildiz.edu.tr, sepusat@yildiz.edu.tr}
Abstract
According to Aristo’s mimesis theory, art is
imitation of nature (real). An art product, says
Aristo, is most valuable when it imitates the complete
nature well. Even though the opinion of the condition
that art must imitate nature has been forgotten since
19. century, it can be said that Aristo’s description of
art is still effective.
With the aid of computer technology, it’s possible
to make models that can not be differentiated from
the real. In this study, it will be argued that the
computer aided photo-real models is whether art or
not, on the guidance of the Aristo’s theory of art.

1. Introduction
No doubt, in 20th century, one of the most
important technological developments is the
discovery of the half-conductors and the electronic
revolution, which come true as a result of this. By
the second of this century, along with the
development of electric technology, humankind was
acquainted with computer technology, which would
change the perception of the world, totally.
Computers, which had been used for the automation
systems before, were started to be used for the
production of images since 1960’s and as a result of
both the techniques of computer aided image
productions and the development of computer
technology’s itself, the production and reproduction
(especially as quantity) of the work of art maybe
reached to a dimension that can even bewilder
Walter Benjamin.
The word modeling consists of the word modus
(measure) and modo (measured) and can be defined
as a system, which represent another system for an
aim . (Larousse, 1986) Also the computers, which
work in mathematical expressions and in binary
number system (by using digits 0 and 1), do the
modeling process as numerically and symbolic
thanks to this working system. As symbolic
modeling is the most abstract (because it is abstract)
and most easily manipulated one, the computers may

1

copy the modeling techniques of iconic and
analogue which the humankind uses for centuries.
As a result of this ability of copying, computers may
turn into tools like tape recorder, telephone or the
source of light, and into a tool which can project or
more importantly produce images easily.
The usage of the computers in producing image
production started in 1960’s together with the studies
of Ivan Sutherland, that he worked in Utah
University. The 3D models in the shapes of wire
frame, which are materialized on computer (or on
imaginary environment) by Sutherland, constituted
the basis of Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling
along with techniques of surface forming, tissue
covering and shadowing as a result of the works of
researchers like Henri Gouraud and Bui Thong
Phong.
But today, as an outcome of the development of
computer technology and depending on this,
development of the techniques of computer-aided
modeling and image production, the images called
computer graphics (CG) came to a point that they
could be distinguished from the real images only by
the experts of the subject. By the help of the
computer-aided 3D modeling software, which are
increasing numerically and getting complicated, the
computers started to imitate the appearance of reality
(nature) close to perfect and because of its this
feature, it is started to be used intensely, in
architecture, in the design of industry products,
especially in art of cinema, shortly almost in
everywhere visual designs are made.
Especially for the last ten years, as the products of
the Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling, which is
increasing and being more perfect, are often used in
the field of projects, it should be answered what
these products are and where they are among the

1 Iconic modeling: The modeling, which is done by using the shape of an
object and diminishing this shape in certain proportions. The models like
scale model, picture, statue is included into that class.
Analogue Modeling: The models, which are prepared to analyze the abstract
concepts visually, which does not have a shape. The graphic of population
change, equal height bents or paintings are the examples for that modeling
type.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

activity of design, (in a clearer way) where they are
among art.
To evaluate this activity, which can imitate reality
that closer to perfection, as art, we should apply to
the theories of Aristotle, which mentions that art is
an imitation of reality. According to the theories of
Aristotle, if it is evaluated which fields of art the
activity of Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling
intersect with and leaves from, it will be an
important start to name after this activity correctly.

as no other art could do until now and in some cases
even the experts of the subject are hesitant about if
these images are real or not.

2. Aristotle’s Definition Of Art
Aristotle, in his famous book Poetika which tells
the form of the Greek Tragedies, states that art is the
imitation of reality so to say mimesis. Aristotle
mentions: “Art of poetry is seems to be the two main
debtors, which generally has the basis of its existence
from human nature. One of these is the imitation
impulse and exists in humans from their birth.
Humans are distinguished from all other creatures
especially with their extraordinary ability of
imitating and achieve their preliminary knowledge
by imitation. Secondly, it is the sense facing all the
imitation products that it is the characteristic of
human. What we feel for the works of art proves
that.” [3]
According to Aristotle, when someone sees a
corpse lying on the floor in blood, they may be
disgusted and does not want to look more, but if they
see the same corpse in a work of art they cannot
resist looking at it and feels great pleasure.
Although Aristotle’s point of view which
mentions that art imitates nature, has lost its power
especially today’s plastic arts and works of art begin
to create their own reality instead of imitating the
reality in nature especially after the abstract
expressionist movement, this situation is not left
outside in Aristotle’s definition of art. Aristotle adds:
“Someone who examine a picture learns what this
picture depicts, whose picture it is in real. Because of
this, looks at the picture with pleasure. But if object,
which the picture is related to, is not seen before, this
picture, which is an imitation, does not awaken a
feeling like this kind of a work of art. In contrast,
technical perfection awakens a feeling of like that
because of the color or a reason like that .” [3]
These lines point out that Aristotle’s claim that
art is an imitation of reality (nature) still protects its
validity (in spite of the movements like
impressionism, cubism, post-impressionism, abstract
expressionism that are rejecting the efforts of
imitating the reality most efficaciously).
When the activity of computer-aided modeling is
observed, it can be mentioned that it confronts with
Aristotle’s definition of art, most efficaciously. The
images, which are produced by the help of the
models materialized (or turned out to be an art) on
computers, can imitate reality (nature) as perfectly

Figure 1 Computer graphic, which is
materialized by using the computer-aided
modeling program 3DS Max software. Tap.
[1]

3. According To Aristotle’s Mimesis
Theory, Computer-Aided Photo-Real
Modeling
The graphic called Tap in Figure-1 is an example
of a typical stable image from the point of both
production and presentation methods as a product of
Computer-Aided
Photo-Realist
Modeling.
Especially, to argue on the stable images of
Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling, the graphic
of Tap should be a proper choice.
So over this graphic, this question may be asked:
Is the image called Tap in Figure-1 or are the
images that are produced as a result of ComputerAided Photo-Real Modeling works of art?
In order to give an answer to that question, how
Aristotle mentioned the definition of art should be
examined and how the images, (computer graphic will be known as CG) which are acquired as a result
of Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling activity
included into that definition should be observed.
Aristotle divides the fields of art by considering
three features. He mentions that all fields of art try to
imitate reality, but these imitations are distinguished
according to:
• 3.1 The objects that are imitated
• 3.2 The style of imitating
• 3.3 The tool that is used for
imitating

3.1 The Division Of Arts From The Point
Of The Imitated Objects According To The
Theory Of Mimesis And Computer-Aided
Photo-Real Modeling
Aristotle mentions that arts imitate the ones that
are active from the point of the imitated objects. But

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

according to Aristotle, the artist should show his
emotions and activate some emotions of the receiver
during that imitation. Because while declaring
“…Even it is tried to be given the name poet who
mentions a subject related sometimes to medical
science or natural sciences; but (for example)
between Homeros and Empedokles, there is no
common point rather than writing in meters. As it is
right, Homeros called as poet. Besides, Empedokles
should better be called as a nature scientist.” Aristo
underlines that the person who will be called as an
artist should express his emotions on the subject of
the art of poetry, in his example given in Poetika.
For this reason, from the phrase of the ones that are
activating, which is mentioned above, should not be
concluded that it is talking about the physical
movements. According to Aristo, a still-life is also
activating the emotions, so to say it is on motion.
If this evaluation is handled, it is observed that the
products of Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling
are working on the visual images like the arts of
photograph, painting, sculpture, cinema. But it is not
enough to question if the activity of Computer-Aided
Photo-Real Modeling is an art or not just as it is
working on the same objects with these arts. In
conclusion, all arts work on the objects or the
emotions that stimulate human perceptions.

3.2 The Division Of Arts On The Manner
Of Imitation According To Mimesis Theory
When the division of arts are handled from the
point of its imitating style, as it is seen that Aristotle
has fallen into an important mistake, he has
mentioned that good and noble poets imitate the
behaviors of good and noble characters from the
point of view of morality and loose poets imitate the
behaviors of simple people, again, from the point of
view of morality and from that point he confused the
concepts of good and beautiful, Kant pointed out the
source of that delusion on the subject of aesthetic by
2
the help of his theories, centuries after Poetika .

from that angle. [3] According to Aristo, the arts
are divided according their usage of presentation and
production images like colors, figures, rhythm,
words and harmony. In Poetika, where the
development of theatre is explained Aristotle shows
how he divides the arts. Theatre is a very proper
example for this division. Because the art of theatre
and music are the arts, which are presented on the
moment that they are produced, so to say as they are
arts that need active performance, (music could not
be recorded in the times of Aristotle) they have lived
their change both in production and in presentation at
the same time.
As it is mentioned in Poetika, theatre (or with its
name tragedy which is traced in the book) sprang up
from the songs sang by a big chorus, in the festivals
which were done in the months of spring to celebrate
the rebirth of Dionysus - the God of wine. The songs,
which were sang in a certain harmony and which
only told the mythological stories about Gods before,
had achieved dialogues as Thespis placed a narratoractor with the chorus in 6th century B.C., had
developed more as Aeschylus placed the second and
Sophocles placed the third actor, later on and the
basis of today’s theatre was set. As the process points
out, while the activity of singing the poems by a
chorus with an harmony was included in the branch
of art, it could not be defined as an art of music after
Thespis had added the narrator and the dialogues
which were not necessary to be harmonic, but
provided the activity’s presentation technique to
change, to give a new name to the activity, on
account of that a new art to be born: Theatre.
(Dilmen, 2002)
The question of naming after Computer Aided
Photo-Real Modeling activity as an art, may be
answered by pointing out that both production and
presentation techniques are different from the other
branches of arts.

3.3 The Division Of Arts On The Manner
Of The Tools, Which Are Used, According
To Mimesis Theory And Computer-Aided
Photo-Real Modeling
From the point of tool that is used for imitating,
Aristotle mentions that different branches of art
imitate reality in different ways (presentation) and
with different tools (production) and they are divided
2 According to Kant, aesthetic is interested in the division of beautiful and
ugly and if a true idea is expressed in a good way, the beautiful is achieved.
But the division cannot be made between good and beautiful because good
and bad are ethical, true and false are epistemological, beautiful and ugly
are aesthetical divisions and should not be confused.

3.3.1 The Division Of Arts On The Manner Of
Their Presentation Styles, According To Mimesis
Theory And Computer Aided Photo-Realist
Modeling
As it is mentioned in Part 3.3 Aristotle divided the
arts according to the elements that are used. This
classification which bases on the elements is detailed
more and when the presentation extents of the arts
are observed, a classification like in Table - 1 will
appear.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

EXTENT
ELEMENTS
ARTS

Visual

Auditory
Figure

Word

Harmony

Motion

Functionality

Voice

2D

3D

Music
Dance
Literature
Theatre
Painting
Sculpture
Architecture
Photograph
Cinema

Table 1 The arts according to the images and presentation types that are used
When Table - 1 is observed, it is seen that the
minimum needs of the arts are taken as the basis. For
example, the art of music, by using dynamic
harmonies, in the auditory extent so to say by
making voices reaches the human perception. The art
of theatre by using dynamic figures and voices, it
reaches the human perception in the three
dimensional visual environments. When the voice
element is withdrawn from the art of theatre, so to
say when an activity, which consists of figures in
dynamic condition of three dimension environment,
this activity is named after dance. Only the art of
literature is handled as written literature in Table 1. It is well known that one of the best ways to
transfer literature is narration (even nowadays when
it is in written). But transferring literature in
narration is a performance and it is included in the
field of theatre. If architecture is observed it can be
seen that it is the only art which has the element of
functionality. When the functionality element is
withdrawn from the art of architecture, the activity is
called sculpture. For example when a balcony is
taken from its place, the Ionic Columns under the
balcony will become sculptures instead of being
architecture elements.
Of course it must be said that in this table
“activities” are not observed from the “qualitative”
point. The table’s basis is the “quantiative
observation” of the elements of arts.
The element of rhythm that Aristotle talks about,
is not included in Table - 1. Because arts often use
the element of rhythm, but rhythm is not an element
sine qua non. Even in the art of music, where the
element of rhythm is often used, there are works
without rhythm. Of course here the element of
rhythm points out the elements that are repeated in

certain periods and that Aristotle handled as the
concept of measure in poetry.
When Figure - 1
is observed over the
presentation environment of Table - 1, it is seen that
it,
first,
collides
with painting and then the art of photograph.
Because Figure - 1 (numerically) consists of the
stable figures that do not have dynamic elements and
that are registered in a two dimensional environment.
But Figure - 1 is close to the art of photography
more than the art of painting. Because the resulted
product looks like a photograph. It will be enough to
say that it collides with painting or photograph as the
presentation environment for this part. The question
of why it gets close to photograph will be handled in
Part 3.3.2.
It is the same with the moving images that are
acquired as an outcome of Computer Aided PhotoReal Modeling. When these products are observed
according to Table - 1, it is traced that presentation
collides with the art of cinema. When the computer
aided photo-real effects or the films that are
materialized totally by Computer Aided Photo-Real
Modeling, which are popular in the last ten years are
observed, it is seen that the activity of Computer
Aided Photo-Real Modeling uses the techniques
which provide the acquired image seem like it is
acquired by the camera of a film. The art of cinema
acquires the motion by the stable images, which are
shown one after another and has its basis on the
principle of showing the images as if they are in
motion by the help of Phi effect in human
perception. So the motion is acquired in this way as
an outcome of Computer Aided Photo-Real
Modeling activity. If moving images that are
acquired over Computer Aided Modeling software

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

are analyzed by the help of special programs, it may
be observed that it consists of stable images. (Figure2, Figure-3)

Figure 2 The moving image frames that
are prepared by computer aided modeling
software 3DS Max [2]

Figure 3 The frames from the film of The
Great Dictator (1940) that Charlie Chaplin
directed (on the left side Paulette Godard,
on the right side Charlie Chaplin)
In conclusion as a type of presentation, the stable
images that are captured as a result of ComputerAided Photo-Real Modeling activity shows the same
features with the art of painting and photography, so
the moving images with the products of the art of
cinema.
Thus,
Computer-Aided
Photo-Real
Modeling activity is added to Table -1 as it is in
Table - 2.

3.3.2 The Division Of Arts On The Manner Of
Their Production Styles, According To Mimesis
Theory And Computer Aided Photo-Realist
Modeling
If the production technique or the materials that
are used during production are observed, a
classification like in Table - 3 can be made.
The arts music, dance and theatre, which are
experienced just when it is produced, are also arts,
which its production technique along with its
material, intersect with the presentation environment.
Music is both produced and presented by the help of
voices and harmonies, dance is by the help of
motion, theatre is by the help of voice and motion.
But among these arts although music can be
registered in certain places to be experienced later
on, without a corruption in its form during that
experience from the register (and this situation has
its sources from the fact that human’s auditory
perception is less developed than his visual
perception, because music spoils because of
registering even in the most developed systems), it is
observed that when dance and theatre are registered
in certain places and experienced from that register,
(at least in that age) their form is totally corrupted.
Because when these arts registered with camera and
watched in any atmosphere, they lose the feature of
being dance and theatre , anymore.3
When the arts, which should only be recorded to
be experienced, are observed, literature makes its
production by using the words and abstract
expressions so to say the letters that are essential to
record these words in certain places, painting uses
paints or other materials which are essential to
produce the figures on a flat ground, and sculpture
uses
materials
which
may
express the figures in a three-dimensional way.
Besides from the point of both production and

EXTENT
ELEMENTS
Activity

Visual

Auditory
Figure

Word

Harmony

Motion

Voice

2D

3D

Computer-Aided Phot-Real
Modeling

Table 2 The elements and the presentation type that Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling
uses
presentation, the definitions that are made until now,
comprise the activities like video, installation or
In Table - 2 the element of motion is pointed out
performance. Because , if Table - 1 and Table - 3 is
as grey. The reason for this is it may capture both
observed, it will be traced that, the art of video is
stable and moving images (the ones that consist of
included
into the field of cinema (although the
stable images) as a result of the activity of
opposite
is
claimed), the placements that does not
Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling. The three
dimension column, which is pointed as white, will be
explained in the part 4. Conclusion.

3 At least, this stationary will be valid until to the date that both dance and
theatre will be registered and experienced in three-dimensionality.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

contain video or performance is included into the
field of statue, the activities that are defined as
performance is included into the field of theatre.
Also in Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling
technique, it is used a technique different from the
other branches of art. The production surrounding of
the computer aided modeling is the one that is
presented by pack of software in certain interfaces on
computers. Again when it is traced over Figure-1, the
modeller entered the measures of the tap on
computer
by
the
help

object that he/she produced by the help of a pack of
software. It is encountered with one of the obstacles
on the way that Computer Aided Photo-Real
Modeling is considered to be an art. Modeling
software has taken the product of photographing
which is again another branch of an art, put it into
practice on the produced object by changing it in
various ways or not even changing it a bit. It is
known that this technique, which is indispensable to
acquire an image close to reality in modeling
activity, is also traced in collage paintings . But in
collages,
the
object,
which
is
Production Tools

Arts
Music

The tools that are useful to produce dynamic voices in different frequencies (ex; oboe, flute,
violin) (voices in different frequencies consist the notes so the notes consist the harmony)

Dance

The tools that can create motion in three dimension environment (ex; human body)

Literature

The materials that are useful to register the words in 2 dimension environments (ex; compound,
paper)

Theatre

The tools that can create motion and voice in three dimension environment (ex; human body,
human throat)

Painting

The materials that are useful to register figures in 2 dimension environments (ex; paints, tuals)

Sculpture

The materials that are useful to register figures in 3 dimensional environments (ex; plaster, clay)

Architecture

The materials that are useful to register figures in 3 dimensional environments to make
environment for human life (ex; steel, cement, glass)

Photograph

The materials that are useful to register the real images in 2 dimension environments (ex; photocamera)

Cinema

The materials that are useful to register the real images in 2 dimension environments with their
motion
(ex; camcorder)

Table 3 The arts according to their production type
of pack of software and as an outcome of this, there
came out an imaginary model called solid model .
This model can be seen from different angles, its
picture can be acquired, can be turn into in any shape
that is wanted in imaginary surrounding (just like in
real life). Even, this produced tap model is superior
to the objects in real life on the point that it can
materialize the transaction, which is mentioned
above, because it does not have the material features
like weightiness and passification.
But this solid model, that is produced, is only an
virtual object which is defined to the memory of the
computer and whose borders are outlined and any
image produced from its this state can not be close to
the imitation of reality. So on this point, the modeller
materializes another process on this solid model,
which he/she has produced: Mapping. In this
transaction, which has its name from the word map,
the modeller benefits from any photograph of tap or
from a photograph of a real tap’s material that he/she
wants to imitate and dresses this photograph on the

the product of another branch of art, is presented
without breaking off its own identity . For instance,
in a collage where parts are taken from Leonardo’s
painting Mona Lisa, although the painting of Mona
Lisa is broken off from its own context, the artist
who makes the collage knows and shows that it is
another painting. In Computer Aided Photo-Real
Modeling’s
technique
called
mapping,
a photograph is both broken off its own context and
is shown as if it is already the part of the produced
outcome product. In a more clear expression, by
using a product of art, which has imitated reality
perfectly, supposedly imitates reality. For instance,
4
the painter Aivazovsky is said to be one of the best

4 Ivan Aivazovsky (1817 – 1900): The most popular representation of
Russian sea painters in 19th century. In a period, he was invited to Istanbul
by Sarkis Balyan, who was the architect Ottoman Palace and signed many

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

painters that can draw sea and of course Aivazovsky
makes that by using paints. So Computer Aided
Photo-Real Modeling’s technique of mapping
resembles that as if Ayvazovsky takes a photograph
of sea and demonstrates it as if he painted that
photograph himself in his painting, instead of
drawing that painting of sea with his paints and
brushes. (Figure - 4)
As a result of the activity of Computer-Aided
Photo-Real Modeling, to capture stable or moving
images, the modeler applies to some important
transactions directed to presentation. If Figure - 1 is
observed more carefully, these transactions can be
seen.
In Figure - 1, as it is in photographs, the tap is
seen clear and the objects, which are far from the tap
or close to the tap is seen unclear. Besides, generally
in photograph, the corruption of image in the shape
of dotted, which is seen with the films of high
sensitivity
in

film in high sensitivity, is called noise. In different
packs of softwares, although the names of these
techniques change, the thing they do is mainly the
same.
The most important technique that is used during
capturing moving images is the technique of motion
blur. When an image is taken with camera in real
life, if the motion in image is fast and if the camera
takes that image in low posturing level, as the
frames, that are taken by camera, are examined one
by one, it is recognized that the dynamic object in
these frames is not seen clearly and there becomes a
turbidity on the way of movement. In Figure - 3, why
Charlie Chaplin, on the right side, is blurred while
the camera is following Paulette Godard, on the right
side, is the reason. So the technique motion blur,
that is one of the techniques which is mostly used in
the moving images which are acquired by the help of
Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling programs,
imitates this effect, also. When the technique of
motion blur is used on the frames that are seen on
Figure - 2, every view of the frames will be same
with Figure - 5.

Figure 4 Ivan Aivazovsky – “The Billow”
(1889) (oil on canvas– Russian Museum, St.
Petersburg–Russia)[4]

Figure 5 The moving image frames that
are prepared by using the technique of
motion blur by Computer-Aided Photo-Real
Modeling software 3DS Max. (to see the
original way of the frames look Figure - 2) [2]

real world and which is called as grain, is
recognized. Both of these features are not the
characteristics of Computer Aided Photo-Real
Modeling technique, on the contrary they are the
special interferences that are made to demonstrate
the picture as photo-realist during modeling.
Because the image, which is acquired in modeling
programs, is carried out various processes by both
the modeling program’s itself and by the other
programs that can accompany this program, before
or after it is acquired. The thing mentioned in here is
the technique, which provides the main object to be
seen clearly and which provides the objects that are
far from it or close to it to be seen unclear, is called
depth glowing and the technique, which provides the
whole picture to be seen as if it is registered by a
paintings and portraits of Padishahs, while he was traveling around
Anatolia.

When the images, which are acquired by the
activity of Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling as
a result of all these interferences, are shown to
someone who is not an expert in modeling, most
probably they will not recognize that these images
are acquired on computer. But when they are told
that these are not photographs or cinema films and
that these are materialized computer-aided, they will
have the pleasure felt by imitation just as Aristotle
had mentioned. But this pleasure is misleading.
Because the products of Computer-Aided Photo-Real
Modeling like these are not the imitations of reality
or nature but the imitations of another art that is
imitating reality . When the audience learns that
these pictures are acquired on computer, they are
bewildered at the pictures’ resemblance to
photographs or cinema films and has a pleasure after

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

that situation. When the works of art and the
divisions between them are observed, it is seen that
all arts are busy with the imitation of reality, not with
the imitation of another art. But in Computer Aided
Photo-Real Modeling, the resulted product is
subjected to various interventions to make it photorealist, in other words the modeller struggles hard to
make his product resemble to the resulted product of
another art.
In conclusion, the activity of Computer-Aided
Photo-Real Modeling as a production type may be
added to Table - 3 like in Table - 4.
When the establishments on both technique of
presentation and production which are acquired as a
result of Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling are
observed, it can be realized that Computer Aided
Photo-Real Modeling activity is not an activity of art
if the presentation and production conditions are
considered. Because this activity uses the products of
other branches of art during production, shows these
products as its own and imitates other arts (even by
imitating the limitations of these arts to imitate
reality) that imitate reality rather than reality’s itself
in the resulted product.
But all these establishments do not mean that
Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling will not be an
art, later on. It is necessary to have a production
technique, material and presentation surrounding

Production Tools

Activity

Computer-Aided Photo-Real
Modeling

of another assistant with the assistance of the
computer’s superior features of mathematical
calculation. The image of brass on the tap’s valve (or
another metal in yellow) may also be acquired easily
with the assistance of solid modeling and reflection
calculations (as a result of reflecting the images of
other solid models around it on the valve).
So the modeling software, as a result of the
developments both in computers and in modeling
techniques will gain a production technique
independent from other arts, if the tissues are
produced with its own techniques just the same with
the production of reflection and shadowing, without
applying to the mapping technique.
The question of when will Computer-Aided
Photo-Real Modeling experience the plastic art
movements like impressionism, post- impressionism,
expressionism, when the Computer-Aided PhotoReal Modeling has reached a technique of production
o its own finds its answer. In conclusion, the
movements like impressionism, post-impressionism,
expressionism, abstract expressionism, which rejects
the most efficacious imitations of reality in plastic
arts, existed as a result of the re-questioning the
image production techniques of its own which
provides it to produce the imitation of reality, of art
of painting, which has gone into a crisis especially
after the invention of photograph. Now as Computer

The machines that can register the objects and environment in three dimension in
numerical environments (ex; computer)
By covering the surfaces of these objects, the photographs (the resulted products of
the art of photograph)
In some situations that can not seen too often, the moving images that are used to
cover the surface (the resulted product of the art of cinema)

Table 4 Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling according to the production style
of its own for Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling
to be an art.

4. Conclusion
When Figure - 1 is examined again, it is seen that
the tap has its shadow on the wooden that it is linked
to. Shadow is the outcome that is acquired only with
its own techniques without using any other branch of
art by modeling software. In other words, modeling
software may imitate shadow (so to say reality) by
using only its own techniques now. Even though in
this picture, the tap’s valve is acquired through the
process of mapping , it is also possible to make that
valve by only using the techniques of modeling
software’s own. Modeling software can imitate the
situations like shadow and reflection that can be
counted mathematically easily and without the help

Aided Photo-Real Modeling uses the outcome
production of other arts, especially the art of
photograph, it cannot materialize the break off from
most efficacious imitation of reality and it cannot
pass over the level of interpretation of reality
according to different people.
When it is handled as the environment of
presentation, it is necessary for Computer Aided
Photo-Real Modeling to find its own presentation
environment instead of using the data of art of
photography or cinema. From that angle computer
aided “simulations” seem to build up the
presentation environment of Computer Aided PhotoReal Modeling. In simulations, it is possible to
experience the imaginary places materialized on
computers with the assistance of virtual glasses and
data suits and this is an environment that no other art
uses.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

So how Computer Aided Photo-Real Modeling’s
outcome product that can be considered as work of
art , will be, may be predicted. For instance, if we
consider a landscape painting, (its appearance,
modal) which is done by using Computer Aided
Photo-Real Modeling, all objects and elements in
this image should be acquired only with its own
techniques of modeling software. So to say, if there is
an image of lake in the landscape painting, modeling
software should materialize the lake totally with its
own techniques, not with using mapping or another
technique like that. Or probably, during that
transaction instead of the solid modeling technique,
which is used by recent modeling software, the
techniques that can provide this material to consist
in the same way by entering certain features. In this
way, when a leaf is tried to be made, a photograph of
the leaf will not be used but the tissue of the leaf will
be materialized with the techniques of modeling
software’s own. Also in its presentation, this
landscape painting modal should not be expressed
with the data like photograph or moving image. The
presentation of the landscape painting modal to the
audience should be with the assistance of virtual
glasses and data suits, the audience should have a
trip inside this modal. The motion, during the
audience’s experience of the modal should be done
with computer’s technique of putting the objects that
it defined mathematically, into motion again in the
mathematical circle as real-timed, and not with the
technique of showing the stable images one after
another in a fast way.
Only a resulted product like that can enable the
activity of Computer-Aided Photo-Real Modeling to
be called as art. It may be mentioned that a resulted
product like that can change in time, and be
evaluated according to the modeller artist of reality,
rather than producing the imitation of reality, both as
production and as presentation technique.
But when it comes to a point that it can produce
an outcome product like that, the activity of
computer aided modeling may be defined as an art
and it can be mentioned that this type of a resulted
product change in time, that it may pass over to the
interpretation of reality according to the modeling
artist , instead of producing the imitation of reality
both as the technique of production and
presentation.

[3]
ARISTOTELES, Poetika, Çev:
øsmail Tunalı, Remzi Kitabevi, østanbul. 1999.
[5]

[4]
http://www.abcgallery.com/A/aivazovs
ky/aivazovsky31.html; Olga’s Gallery.
DøLMEN, G., Önsöz, Oyun Dizisi – 71 Eski Yunan
Tragedyaları – 1 Aiskülos –Sofokles, Mitos – Boyut
Tiyatro Yayınları, 2. Basım, østanbul. 2002.

References
[1]
3DSMax, from the file “Tap.jpg” in
the installed folder “images” of Autodesk Discreet
3DS Max 5.0, 2002.
[2]
3DSMax, from the file of “abix-fallsplineIK.max”
in the
installed folder
“3dsmax5\scenes\Version5Features\AnimationIK”
of Autodesk Discreet 3DS Max 5.0, 2002.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

