Poster: IceXplorer: Studying Great Lakes Ice Cover
Stina Bridgeman∗
Hobart and William Smith Colleges

A BSTRACT
IceXplorer is a tool for analyzing variations in ice cover on Lake
Erie. It enhances the data and pre-packaged analysis currently
available in the Great Lakes Ice Atlas and serves as an example
of a small, focused application where simple but carefully-chosen
visualizations, interaction techniques, and automated data analysis
are combined to create an effective tool for advancing scientific research.
Index Terms: J.2 [Physical sciences and engineering]—Earth
and atmospheric sciences H.4.3 [Information systems applications]:
Communications Applications—Information browsers H.5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]: User interfaces—Graphical
user interfaces, Interaction styles
1

I NTRODUCTION

Variations in the ice cover on the Great Lakes have significant impacts on lake-effect snow storms, short-range weather forecasting,
shipping, hydroelectricity, fishing, and regional ecology. Yearly
variations in ice cover have been well-studied (e.g. [1, 2]), but the
processes and conditions responsible for rapid changes in ice cover
— on the scale of days rather than weeks or months — have received much less attention. Identifying periods of rapid change is
the first step in studying the mesoscale and synoptic-scale weather
conditions associated with such events.
2

DATA

AND

P REVIOUS W ORK

The NOAA Great Lakes Ice Atlas [3] contains daily ice cover concentrations for the winter seasons 1973–2002, and an addendum
includes data for 2003–2005 [4]. Each daily grid file contains the
percentage of ice cover for each 2.5km square grid cell over the
Great Lakes. Daily grids are available for each day of the winter
season (December 1 through May 1).
For analysis, it is important to note whether the data in a daily
grid comes from direct observation, is interpolated (for days without observation), or is missing (for days before the first and after
the last observation in a given season). It is also important to distinguish data from different sources (such as the Canadian Ice Service
or the US National Ice Center) because the frequency of observations depends on the source.
The Great Lakes Ice Atlas data has been visualized before
(e.g. [5]), and daily images and season-long animations are available as part of the Ice Atlas. IceXplorer enhances this presentation by providing an interactive exploration environment under the
user’s direct control, options for selecting the area of study, and
tools for directly comparing the ice cover on different days.
3

I CE X PLORER

The IceXplorer tool utilizes linked displays of information and direct manipulation to provide an interactive environment for study∗ e-mail:

bridgeman@hws.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

ing variations in ice cover over all or part of the lake. The user
interface is shown in Figure 1.
At the top of the window is a time series showing the daily average ice concentration over the area of interest. (The area of interest
is selected by manipulating the dark-shaded selection box in any of
the ice concentration maps or using the “select area range” spinners.) In the daily average time series, both the vertical position
and color of the dot encode the average ice concentration; the type
of dot (open circle, solid circle, or solid rectangle) and size of dot
(small, medium, or large) indicate the data source (CIS, NIC, or
combination) and data type (missing, interpolated, or observation),
respectively.
Two days (designated “start” and “end”) are selected for comparison by direct manipulation of the dark-shaded selection box in the
daily average time series or using the “select date range” spinner
controls. Shortcuts are provided for quickly selecting a particular
interval length, and changing the start day or dragging the selection
box automatically adjusts the end day to preserve the interval length
so that it is convenient to scan for events of a particular duration.
The two ice concentration snapshots each provide two views of a
particular day’s ice cover: a color-coded map shows the geographic
distribution of the ice, and a histogram provides quantitative information about the fraction of the area of interest with a particular
degree of ice cover. In addition, the data source and type are displayed on each map.
The third view, in the lower right corner of the window, shows
the difference in ice concentration between the start and end days.
The color-coded map shows the difference in a spatial context,
while the histogram shows the fraction of the area of interest with a
particular degree of change.
The colors used in all of the displays are consistent with those
used in the daily ice concentration images and animations in the Ice
Atlas [3].
4

U SING I CE X PLORER
E VENTS

TO

I DENTIFY R APID C HANGE

IceXplorer was developed to support a study on rapid variations in
ice cover on Lake Erie [6]. In the study, a “rapid change event”
is defined as something distinct (bounded by local minima, local
maxima, or periods of near-constant ice concentration), monotonic
(only increasing or decreasing) or substantial (greater than ±10%
change per day), short (lasting a week or less), and resulting in a
significant change in ice cover over a significant portion of the lake
(defined as a set of thresholds involving the percent change in ice
cover and the percent of the lake area affected). Events are classified according to the type of change (freeze or thaw), the location
of the change (basin-wide or within a particular region of the lake),
and the relationship to other events (simultaneous freezing/thawing
in different regions, alternating freezing/thawing in the same region, or an isolated event).
Potential events satisfying the first three criteria (distinct, monotonic, and short) can be identified from the daily average time series
after selecting the geographical area of interest. Figure 1 shows the
March 9–16 interval starting at a local maximum and ending before
a period of little change. For areas such as the south shore and north
shore (which cannot easily be selected with a rectangular region),
the daily average time series still provides a useful starting point

239

Figure 1: The IceXplorer user interface, showing a central basin thaw event March 9–16, 1990.

because intervals with flatter slopes may correspond to changes in
only one part of the lake.
The difference map and histogram can be used to verify the “distinct” property. For example, looking at the difference histogram
for the next observation period (March 16–19) shows that approximately 93% of the lake has little or no change in ice concentration,
meeting the criteria for a period of near-constant ice. (see Figure 2)
The fourth property (significance) can be verified using the difference histogram. Figure 1 shows that there was an 80-100% decrease in ice cover over 35% of the lake area, surpassing one of the
thresholds for a significant event.
Finally, the daily average time series or the difference histogram
can be used to classify the event as a freeze or thaw event (using the
sign of the slope in the time series or the sign of the predominate
change in the histogram). The difference map can be also used to
identify events occurring in regions smaller than the selected area.
For example, Figure 3 shows the difference map for a north shore
freeze event. Note how the change is confined to the northern portion of the lake.

5 C ONCLUSION
IceXplorer was designed in consultation with the researchers using it. The straightforward visualizations, convenient interaction
mechanisms, and integrated daily average and histogram statistics
simplify the task of identifying periods of rapid ice cover change.
The tool’s successful use [6] demonstrates its utility.
While the current version focuses on Lake Erie, IceXplorer can
easily be extended to one or all of the other Great Lakes by changing a configuration option. It could also be used for other bodies of
water if there is a suitable data source. Furthermore, while IceXplorer was developed specifically for detecting rapid changes, it can
be used as-is for changes over any time period (including multiple
years). One additional improvement that can be made is to allow
the selection of arbitrary areas of interest instead of limiting the selection to a rectangular region. This improvement would make it
easier to identify south shore and north shore events.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wishes to thank Richard Klein for creating the first version of IceXplorer as a course project and Neil Laird and his research students for both needing the tool and providing feedback
on it.
R EFERENCES

Figure 2: Difference map and histogram for a period of near-constant
ice cover. (March 16–19, 1990)

Figure 3: Difference map and histogram for a north shore freeze
event. (March 10–17, 1993)

240

[1] R. A. Assel. Classification of annual Great Lakes ice cycles: Winters
of 1973-2002. Journal of Climate, 18:4895.
[2] R. A. Assel. An ice-cover climatology for Lake Erie and Lake Superior
for the winter seasons 1897–1898 to 1982–1983. International Journal
of Climatology, 10:731.
[3] R. A. Assel. An electronic atlas of Great Lakes ice cover. Technical
report, Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, Ann Arbor,
MI, 2003. http://www.glerl.noaa.gov/data/ice/atlas/.
[4] R. A. Assel. Great Lakes ice cover climatology update: Winters 2003,
2004, and 2005. Technical Report NOAA TM GLERL-135, Great
Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, Ann Arbor, MI, 2005.
[5] R. A. Assel and D. C. Norton. Visualizing Laurentian Great Lakes ice
cycles. Eos, Transaction, American Geophysical Union, 82(7), 2001.
In the Eos electronic supplement.
[6] N. Laird, C. Zarzycki, G. Renninger, and S. Bridgeman. Rapid variations in Lake Erie ice cover: Event characteristics and weather conditions. In 33rd Annual Northeastern Storm Conference, 2008.

