Interactive Poster: A Proposal for Sharing User Requirements for Visual
Analytic Tools
Jean Scholtz
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
ABSTRACT
Although many in the community have advocated user-centered
evaluations for visual analytic environments, a significant barrier
exists. The users targeted by the visual analytics community (law
enforcement personnel, professional information analysts,
financial analysts, health care analysts, etc.) are often inaccessible
to researchers. These analysts are extremely busy and their work
environments and data are often classified or at least confidential.
Furthermore, their tasks often last weeks or even months. It is
simply not feasible to do such long-term observations to
understand their jobs.
How then can we hope to gather enough information about the
diverse user populations to understand their needs? Some
researchers, including the author, have been successful in getting
access to specific end-users. A reasonable approach, therefore,
would be to find a way to share user information. This work
outlines a proposal for developing a handbook of user profiles for
use by researchers, developers, and evaluators.

new and the tools being developed are very diverse and often very
specialized to a particular type of analysis (i.e., social networks,
financial, geo-spatial, temporal, etc.). Secondly, visual tools
require interpretation by the end users.
What makes a
visualization useful to one end user may not make it at all useful
to another. While visualization researchers have guidelines about
lower-level properties of visualizations such as color and layout,
there are as yet few best practices as to what types of
visualizations provide users with insights in their analytic work.
Input from targeted end users is essential in developing these best
practices. Furthermore, if we can associate empirical research and
case studies with particular profiles of users, we can more easily
identify other users with similar profiles who could benefit from
the same visual tools.
A handbook of user profiles could serve as a repository of user
information, including visual tools that were used and the impact
of those tools. Thus the handbook would be an evolving
document providing basic information and links to papers and
reports documenting the full research or case study.

KEYWORDS: user-centered evaluation; visual analytics; user
requirements.

2

INDEX TERMS: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and
Presentation]: Evaluation / methodology; H.5.2 [User Interfaces]:
Evaluation / methodology.
1

WHY WOULD
HANDBOOK?

IT

BE

BENEFICIAL

TO

HAVE

SUCH

A

It is difficult to gain access to end users of visual analytics
systems for many reasons. Furthermore, the tasks they perform
are complex and often take weeks if not longer to complete.
Researchers in visual analytics do not always have the necessary
training to conduct observations and interviews. Transferring
information from field studies of end users to researchers has long
been a challenge. Similar to marketing profiles [1], the humancomputer interaction and usability communities developed the
technique of personas to communicate this information more
effectively [2,3].
Our goal in sharing user information is to help researchers get
started on the right path. Knowing more about different types of
users, including commonalities and differences, would certainly
be useful in beginning a research endeavor that hopes to result in a
commercial software tool. However, this information will not
suffice for later user involvement.
While sharing such information should be helpful in many
domains, it is particularly useful in the field of visual analytics
for several reasons. First, this domain is relatively
_______________________________________
P.O. Box 70, Rockaway Beach, OR 97136
jean.scholtz@pnl.gov

DEVELOPING
INFORMATION

A

FRAMEWORK

FOR

SHARING

USER

The question is what information we will need to collect from
users to understand what they do in enough detail to understand
which users in which domains would benefit from the research we
are doing. The second question is whether or not it is feasible to
share our knowledge of end users with others in the research
community.
What information is necessary in the framework? What
information will help researchers, developers, and evaluators who
are the targeted end users of the framework? We propose to start
with the following information:
•
Overall work domain and user population information
•
Overall description of work (user goals and objectives)
•
Individual tasks including success metrics and constraints
•
Users’ metrics for success
•
Description of data being used
•
Type of analysis
The following is an example of what information might be
included for a user profile of a detective in a criminal
investigation unit.
Law Enforcement – Criminal Investigation Detective
User population and work domain:
Detectives are typically on the force for 15 years before
they become detectives.
Much of their time is spent in their car doing
surveillance and taking notes.
Data analysis is done back at the office.
User Goal:
Reduce Organized Crime in area
User Objective:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

215

Conduct investigations in organized crime, including
drugs, prostitution, and gang activities and apprehend
those involved along with illegal substances and money
User Tasks:
Surveillance
Make a case
Subtasks:
Surveillance of a location (A)
Identify persons who visit that location
Identify vehicles that visit that location
Identify locations visited by persons from location A
Identify person of interest at these locations
Share information with detective on next shift
Analysis:
Timeline of activities and persons, locations involved
Constraints:
Detectives are undercover – do not want to be identified
as police
Cases can last months or even years.
Metrics:
Collect enough evidence of illegal activities to get
permission to use more technology
Collect enough evidence to take the case to court
Data:
Voice notes
Photos
Names and information about people
Location information
What do we need to add that is specific to the field of visual
analytics? One of the tasks listed above is “making the case”.
During the course of doing the surveillance (which can run
months or even years) detectives put all the data collected into a
spreadsheet or some version of a timeline. This can consist of
many people coming and going from a particular location and to
other specific locations, instances of the same people visiting the
same places, at the same or different times, etc. This particular
task certainly seems to be an opportunity for different abstractions
of visualizations. Such visualizations should help detectives
identify patterns that identify suspicious activities and identify
opportunities to apprehend the criminals.
How should this information be entered into the framework? A
solution would be to indicate the type of analysis that is needed
for specific tasks. The work by [4,5,6] would be useful in
developing categories for the analysis tasks that are currently
done.
3

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Visualization and
Analytics CenterTM (NVACTM) located at the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory in Richland, WA. The Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory is managed for the U.S. Department of
Energy by Battelle Memorial Institute under Contract DE-AC0576RL01830.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

WHAT’S NEXT?

While the initial draft of the framework is still under construction,
a few colleagues have seen it or at least have been given the
information that is contained in the framework. For the most part,
the information shared has been relative to a specific role of users
and used in the context of a specific project. Informal feedback
indicates that the information has been useful.
In adding multiple roles to the framework, it is easy to note that
many of the user roles perform the same tasks, but under different
circumstances and with different goals. To accomplish this, it is
important that we find some standardized way to define the tasks
to make these comparisons. While that is relatively easy within a
domain, this may take some work to understand if there are
similar tasks in different domains. This necessitates some
discussions among researchers who are working in user
requirements and user-centered evaluations.
Is the information in the framework useful for researchers?
Initial feedback has been positive but that concerns the
information, not necessarily the presentation of the information.

216

In the examples discussed in the previous section, could
researchers make the same inferences based only on the
information currently in the framework? Researcher feedback is
certainly needed about the usefulness of what is in the framework,
what is missing from the framework, and the presentation of the
framework.
Is it feasible to share user requirements?
Are there
organizational barriers we need to overcome? Are collectors of
the information willing to take the time to put their information
into the handbook format?
There are examples of papers from research in visual analytics
that include descriptions of the end users [7,8] so we feel
confident that this information exists and that it is sharable.
Whether those collecting the information will find enough value
in sharing to help develop the framework and then to help
populate it remains to be seen.
Once the framework is populated with enough material, a series
of experiments and cases studies should be developed to address
both the utility of the information available and the effort needed
to input user requirements. Using an online format for the
handbook, most likely a wiki, will facilitate input of both data and
of comments from those gathering requirements and those using
the information. If enough interest is generated, we will propose a
workshop on the handbook for VAST 2010 to discuss the
structure and content of the information and the aspects of
sharing. While this is very early work, we are interested in
collaborators willing to share information and work on the initial
format of the profiles.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Moore, A.G. Crossing the Chasm. Harper Collins Publishers, New
York. 1991
Cooper, A. “The inmates are running the asylum”. Macmillan
Publishing. Indianapolis, IN 1999.
Shinah, R. “Persona Development for Information-rich Domains”,
CHI '03 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems,
Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA, 2003, pp. 830-831.
Macmillan R. Amar, and J. Stasko, "Knowledge Precepts for Design
and Evaluation of Information Visualizations," IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Vol. 11, No. 4,
July/August 2005, pp. 432-442.
J. Yi, Y.h Kang, J. Stasko and J. Jacko, "Toward a Deeper
Understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information
Visualization", IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, (Paper presented at InfoVis '07), Vol. 13, No. 6,
November/December 2007, pp. 1224-1231
Z. Pousman, J. Stasko and M. Mateas, "Casual Information
Visualization: Depictions of Data in Everyday Life", IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, (Paper
presented at InfoVis '07), Vol. 13, No. 6, November/December 2007,
pp. 1145-1152
McLachlan, P., Munzner, T., Koutsofios, E., and S. North,
“LiveRAC: Interactive Visual Exploration of System Management
Time-Series Data”, CHI 2008 Proceedings, Florence, Italy, 200,
pp.1483-1492.
Gotz, D. and M. Zhou, “Characterizing Users’ Visual Analytic
Activity for Insight Provenance”, Proc. of IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (2008), pp 123-130.

