Interactive Visual Analysis of Location Reporting Patterns
Derek Overby*

John Keyser†

Jim Wall‡

Department of Computer Science
and Engineering

Department of Computer Science
and Engineering

Department of Industrial and
Systems Engineering

Texas A&M University

Texas A&M University

Texas A&M University

ABSTRACT
Interactive visualization methods are often used to aid in the
analysis of large datasets. We present a novel interactive
visualization technique designed specifically for the analysis of
location reporting patterns within large time-series datasets. We
use a set of triangles with color coding to indicate the time
between location reports. This allows reporting patterns (expected
and unexpected) to be easily discerned during interactive analysis.
We discuss the details of our method and describe evaluation both
from expert opinion and from a user study.
1

INTRODUCTION

Timely analysis of large data collections is a common
challenge. Visual analytics research seeks to provide techniques
for both detecting expected patterns and discovering unexpected
patterns in data [3]. Our method, shown in Figure 1, is designed to
facilitate timely analysis of location reporting data using
interactive visual exploration of simple geometric patterns and
color variations.

location; and the system is designed to generate at least one report
every five minutes. Additional location reports are generated
whenever vehicle’s detected location changes, and therefore we
can assume that the vehicle’s recorded position is changing if
more than 1 report was generated within a five minute period. For
the purpose of our work, the goal of the analyst was to quickly
and effectively analyze the operation of the vehicle location
system to ensure both that the sensor equipment was operational
and that the collection of sensor data was complete. The analyst
also should be able to easily recognize abrupt changes or
anomalies in the reporting pattern for a particular vehicle or the
fleet as a whole within week-size collections of data.
1.2
Traditional Approach
The existing technique to analyze this data included using
traditional graphing and plotting methods like line and bar graphs,
and state plots. These methods were not conducive to and
therefore cumbersome to apply to the required analysis tasks.
Other methods for visual analysis of time-series data [2, 4] were
not suited to support the particular analytic tasks we have
identified, including detection of synchronous system failures and
coordinated movements.
2

Figure 1. Example of Proposed Method

PROPOSED METHOD

Our method to visualize this data is quite simple, and is
designed primarily to support fault and motion analysis. We
render isosceles triangles oriented along a horizontal time axis to
represent periods between location reports for a particular entity
(see Figure 2). The length of the triangle is proportional to the
length of time between the ordered series of reports, and the
triangle will fade abruptly to red if the length exceeds a userspecified threshold (5 minutes in our case). In order to simplify
dense regions, if a triangle at the current zoom scale approaches
sub-pixel resolution horizontally, that triangle will ‘merge’ with
its neighbors to form a rectangle.

Using our method, problems with system configuration or data
collection during simulation exercises can rapidly be identified by
pattern anomalies in order to avoid increasing the already high
cost of integrating large numbers of live players with simulated
systems, as is the case in many military testing operations. Using
our method analysts were able to quickly and effectively
recognize both expected and unexpected system outages as well
as coordinated and individual movements.
1.1
Problem Description
Our motivating problem was the interactive analysis of a large
collection of vehicle location reports from a vehicle tracking
system, although we have also used this method to analyze
location report patterns for dismounted units. Each location report
within our target dataset contains a timestamp, a vehicle ID and
*e-mail: dereko@tamu.edu
†e-mail: keyser@cs.tamu.edu
‡e-mail: jim-wall@tamu.edu
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

Figure 2. Detail of Rendering Method

In order to support fault detection at multiple scales, we ensure
both that triangles containing threshold violations are still
represented as red highlights within a merged rectangular region
and that threshold violations within a non-merged triangle are

223

represented with a minimum of 5 columns of red pixels. We
therefore visually highlight threshold violation at a per-pixelcolumn level, as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Threshold Violation Preservation

We render each row of the data using this simple algorithm for
a given time window, which is typically one day in length. An
example is shown below in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Example of Proposed Method

3

RESULTS

In order to evaluate the results of this work, we have designed a
user study to provide experimental data for analysis and sought
expert opinion.
3.1
User Study
Our user study exposes participants to three different interactive
visualization methods using a within-subjects experiment design.
Participants are asked to answer a series of analytic questions
about the test data using each visualization interface. The first
visualization method consists of a simple state plot as well as an
interactive bar graph and line graph depicting the aggregate
number of location reports per 5-minute period. We also ask
participants to use a simplified method similar to our proposed
method (using lines instead of triangles), and finally the proposed
method. The sample data was generated to simulate four days of
data from a training exercise. The simulated exercise involved 40
vehicles reporting over approximately a 12 hour period each day,
and contained approximately 1.2 million reports in total.
During the study, participants were asked to use the provided
visualization methods to answer a series of ten analytic questions
about the sample data. Four of the questions required counting
prominent data features, such as counting the number of vehicles
with no reporting disruptions or the number of vehicles with at
least one reporting disruption longer than 20 minutes. The
remaining six questions required the participant to locate and
identify unique features, such as the largest gap between event
occurrences, the longest period of motion, and the shortest overall
reporting time. Both the order that the three different visualization
methods were presented to each participant and the period of
sample data used was randomly varied. The participants were

224

instructed to indicate if they felt that the current visualization
method was not adequate to answer any given question, but were
otherwise encouraged to answer each question to the best of their
ability.
3.2
Experimental Evaluation
Our current analysis of experimental results is based on
interpretation of initial trends indicated by a small number of
participants in an ongoing study, and should be viewed only as an
initial indicator of the utility of our method.
First, all participants have been able to answer every question
using the proposed method, while questions have been skipped by
at least one participant for each of the other methods. Also,
participants on average have spent approximately 20% less time
using our method to answer the ten questions. Most importantly,
we observed that when using our method, participants have
achieved noticeably greater accuracy than when using prior
methods. In particular, errors in counting and locating features
have been reduced by more than 35% compared to traditional
visualization methods and by more than 20% compared to the
simplified version of our method. While more experimental
results are needed to verify these findings, we believe the initial
trends shown by our current results are promising.
3.3
Expert Opinion
In addition to evaluation of empirical results of our user study,
we also provided a fully-functional implementation of our
visualization method to an expert team of analysts who were able
to use the software to help analyze real datasets similar to the
sample data described in this paper. The expert users stated that:
• Our method allowed them to accomplish in hours what
had taken several days using previous techniques.
• Our method provided a concise and accurate summary of
a full day’s worth of data in one image while visually
highlighting all important data features.
• Our method provided effective output that could easily be
integrated into presentation media to inform high-level
decision makers.
4

CONCLUSION

Ongoing work is currently aimed at additional user evaluation
of the proposed method using the user study we have described
here. We would also like to explore using this visualization
technique in combination with geospatial visualization methods as
well, in order to aid in the analysis of event occurrence patterns
that might correlate with geospatial topography or other
geographic information, similar to Gatalsky et al. [1]. We believe
that this work can be easily extended to provide interactive visual
analysis of event occurrence patterns in other domains as well.
REFERENCES
1. Gatalsky, P., N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko, Interactive Analysis of

2.

3.
4.

Event Data Using Space-Time Cube, in Proceedings of the
Information Visualisation, Eighth International Conference. 2004,
IEEE Computer Society.
Kumar, N., et al. Time-series Bitmaps: A Practical Visualization Tool
for working with Large Time Series Databases. in Proceedings of the
5th SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM'05). 2005.
Newport Beach, CA, USA.
Thomas, J.J. and K.A. Cook, Illuminating the path: The research and
development agenda for visual analytics. 2005: IEEE.
Weaver, C., et al. Visual Analysis of Historic Hotel Visitation
Patterns. In Visual Analytics Science And Technology, 2006 IEEE
Symposium On.

