Visual Knowledge Exploration and Discovery
from Different Points of View
Aba-Sah Dadzie∗

Daniela Petrelli†

Dept. of Computer Science
The University of Sheffield

Dept. of Information Studies
The University of Sheffield

A BSTRACT
Complex scenario analysis requires the exploration of multiple
hypotheses and supporting evidence for each argument posed.
Knowledge-intensive organisations typically analyse large amounts
of inter-related, heterogeneous data to retrieve the knowledge this
contains and use it to support effective decision-making. We
demonstrate the use of interactive graph visualisation to support
hierarchical, task-driven, hypothesis investigation. The visual investigative analysis is guided by task and domain ontologies used to
capture the structure of the investigation process and the experience
gained and knowledge created in previous, related investigations.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces—Graphical user interfaces (GUI); K.6.1 [Management of Computing and Information Systems]: Project and People
Management—Life Cycle
1

I NTRODUCTION

Issue investigation is a process that often spans an extended period of time, during which investigators collate evidence retrieved
from multiple, large-scale data repositories storing information using different media and formats, to support hypotheses formulated
for the root causes of issues raised. The analysis performed in any
one investigation tends to overlap with other (related) open or completed investigations. However, traditional methods for documenting investigations support low re-use of the knowledge gained in
the process [2]. Further, the separation in time and geographical location between investigations means that the relationships between
the analyses carried out are often not recognised [4]; significant effort may therefore be expended repeating analysis of the same or
similar data. Human cognitive ability also limits the exhaustiveness
and completeness of information retrieval and analysis, with a resultant impact on the confidence with which conclusions are drawn.
Visualisation of complex information spaces increases intuitive
analytical ability and promotes insight, by supporting data and
knowledge overviews followed by drilling down to greater detail
in regions of interest. This results in more effective knowledge retrieval, improving understanding of the data and the analysis.
Knowledge workers often rely on the implicit knowledge they
and members of their (knowledge) networks have acquired through
experience. This valuable knowledge is often difficult to access
and re-use outside the informal communities of practice created to
share knowledge, experiences and/or to carry out defined tasks. Ontologies provide structured, formal definitions of concepts and the
relationships between them [5]; expressing this knowledge through
the formalism of ontologies promotes wider exchange and re-use.
We demonstrate how the knowledge stored in ontologies is used
to support hierarchical, visual analysis during issue investigation.
The creators and new users of the knowledge captured are provided
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

a.dadzie@sheffield.ac.uk
d.petrelli@sheffield.ac.uk

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

with support for retrieving previous analyses and the justifications
for the decisions that result. This allows end users to make direct
use of this knowledge and also (re-)use it as a foundation for creating new, richer knowledge in subsequent investigations.
2

K-V IEWS :
A NALYSIS

V ISUAL , I NTERACTIVE , O NTOLOGY - BASED

The process of identifying the root and other related causes of an
issue involves a hierarchical breakdown of potential hypotheses for
the root cause. The analysis begins from a specified hypothesis,
formulated based on knowledge retrieved from the (new) reports
describing the issue and related information in legacy corpora.
We find that hierarchical graph visualisation [3] lends itself
well to the structure of the hypothesis investigation; the K-Views
(Knowledge Views) tool was developed to support the visual, interactive construction of a user’s representation of their knowledge
space. We support the process with the formalised knowledge captured using ontologies that describe issue resolution and detail instances of previous investigations (see Figure 1), to support structured, exhaustive analysis of issues and related data.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Two ontologies that support issue resolution: 1a captures
the structure of a generic document for reporting issues. 1b describes a bicycle assembly and defines concepts for capturing observations of issues, populated with instances of relevant concepts.

Figure 2 illustrates an investigation into the cause of the failure of
a brake system on a bicycle, using the K-Views Analysis Tree that
starts by describing the bicycle assembly, guided by the ontology
in Figure 1b. The tree is then extended from a selection of nodes
to detail the mechanical issues observed. The dialog in the centre
of Figure 2 suggests two sub-concepts for brake cable (which at
this stage has three pieces of evidence attached to it). The user
however creates a new concept split brake cable; selecting Update
will create a new child from the focus.
As the investigation and exploration of the user’s knowledge
space progress evidence may be retrieved from legacy data that
supports or detracts from the hypotheses formulated. New knowledge objects may also be created to record, for e.g., conversations

227

and comments about decisions taken and action lists used to trigger
requests for more information. Visual references to the data and
knowledge objects are combined with drag and drop functionality
to attach the references to nodes in the tree; this provides a visual
reminder of the evidence for or against each hypothesis.

Figure 3: The user’s perspective on the knowledge space is overlaid
on the cloud that provides an overview of the knowledge repository.

Figure 2: An analysis tree used to capture the investigation of a failure of the brake system on a bicycle. The semantic clipboard (bottom) stores visual references to data and knowledge objects.

[4], among others, note the importance of visual representations
of the user’s exploration process and analysis, and the reasons for
the decisions made as the analysis progresses. We capture users’
reasons for attaching evidence to a hypothesis by annotating the
actual document referenced and/or recording free text comments.
Directly attaching comments and tags to the visual items they refer
to contextualises the knowledge created, strengthening the ability
to retrieve this knowledge in context and ensuring that it is properly
interpreted, supporting more effective reuse. The reasons for other
decisions taken during the investigation, such as the discounting of
a branch of the analysis, or flagging a specified hypothesis, sub-tree
or piece of evidence, may also be recorded in the same way. Comments and annotations may be updated as the analysis progresses;
this information is timestamped so that the analysis and a history of
the actions taken may be retrieved as an (annotated) timeline.
A complementary visualisation is being developed, the K-Views
Knowledge Cloud, a semantic network that provides an overview of
the knowledge repository, generated automatically from the structure of the domain ontology. The user’s perspective on the knowledge space, captured in the analysis tree, is overlaid on the graph, as
illustrated in Figure 3. Nodes in the tree that are defined in the ontology are encircled with a bold border, while user-created concepts
(or hypotheses) have a broken border. Edge colour maps to the default relationship, and thickness to the number of relationships between node pairs. Users are alerted to concepts in the ontology, and
therefore, the knowledge space, that have not yet been explored;
the knowledge cloud highlights relationships between node pairs
that are hidden in the more structured but restricted analysis tree.
3

U SABILITY E VALUATION

The first version of the analysis tree was evaluated with twelve
target end users, working in pairs, from three departments in an
aerospace engineering company, using a simulation of an open issue resolution case built based on a real, closed investigation. The
participants extended a base tree representing a point in the simulated investigation, following ontology suggestions where they met
their requirements, and creating new hypotheses as necessary. The
participants found that the structured analysis enabled by the analysis tree mapped well to their mental models and the hierarchical root
cause analysis. Physically attaching evidence to the analysis tree
was found to be especially useful for providing visual context and

228

confirmation of the validity of the hypotheses formulated. A degree
of uniformity was seen in where evidence was attached in the tree,
in node labels and where the new nodes were located. Variations in
the six analysis trees that resulted reflected differences in interpretation of the data provided. These appeared to be based mainly on
users’ departments, and therefore expertise in current use and approach to issue resolution; the different perspectives through which
the participants viewed the investigation. [1] detail the user-centred
design and development and the evaluation of the analytical tools.
4 C ONCLUSIONS & F URTHER W ORK
We describe the use of interactive graph visualisation for hierarchical, hypothesis investigation, by harnessing the added insight visualisation brings to analysis. Our design takes advantage of the
structured knowledge capture enabled by ontologies to guide user
reasoning and obtain effective and exhaustive analysis without increasing users’ cognitive load. Our approach supports visual thinking and analysis, and helps to reveal relationships and other knowledge hidden within data, resulting in intuitive knowledge creation.
Further work involves more intuitive construction of the analysis
tree and navigation through the knowledge cloud. An extended pilot
is to be carried out with the visualisations, working with other analysis and process support tools developed as part of the X-Media
project [6]. This should provide more information on the use of
the analysis tree in real time, the additional support the knowledge
cloud provides for exploration, and support for the synthesis and
reuse of knowledge created by multiple users across investigations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research described is funded by the X-Media project, sponsored by the European Commission (EC) under the Information Society Technologies programme, EC grant number ISTFP6-026978.
R EFERENCES
[1] A.-S. Dadzie, V. Lanfranchi, and D. Petrelli. Seeing is believing: Linking data with knowledge. Information Visualization, in press.
[2] D. Gotz, M. X. Zhou, and V. Aggarwal. Interactive visual synthesis of
analytic knowledge. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science
and Technology 2006, pages 51–58, 2006.
[3] I. Herman, G. Melancon, and M. Marshall. Graph visualization and
navigation in information visualization: A survey. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6(1):24–43, 2000.
[4] Y. B. Shrinivasan and J. J. van Wijk. Supporting exploration awareness
for visual analytics. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science
and Technology, pages 185–186, 2008.
[5] S. Staab and R. Studer, editors. Handbook on Ontologies. Springer,
2004.
[6] The X-Media Project. http://www.x-media-project.org.

