Keynote Address
Using Stories To Understand Patterns
Andrew Glassner

Abstract

Bio

People easily find patterns everywhere, from familiar faces
in pancakes to voices on the wind and tigers in the clouds.
We see patterns behind the migration of birds and which
houses get bought and sold in a neighborhood.
The patterns we perceive are usually in a context,
and frequently that context is a story. The tendency to see
stories is another built-in human quality that has served us
well, from avoiding hungry predators to building loving
relationships. Building a narrative around a set of observed
patterns is a natural and powerful tool for understanding,
because the familiar nature of narrative gives our minds a
structure for entering the patterns imaginatively. The story
we tell gives us a framework for examining and manipulating the patterns, helping us understand their origins
and meanings. Narrative offers a scaffolding from which
we can arrange and re-arrange the component pieces of an
idea, but still keep track of how the pieces hold together.
In this talk I’ll summarize the basic elements of traditional Western narrative, from character design to plot
dynamics. I hope to encourage the idea that we can consciously use this powerful, innate facility to better understand and work with the increasingly complex phenomena
around us.

Dr. Andrew Glassner is a writer-director, and a consultant in story structure, interactive fiction, and computer
graphics. He started working in 3D computer graphics in
1978, and has carried out research at the NYIT Computer
Graphics Lab, the IBM TJ Watson Research Lab, the Delft
University of Technology, Bell Communications Research,
Xerox PARC, and Microsoft Research. He has served professionally as Papers Chair for SIGGRAPH ‘94, Creator of
the Sketches venue at SIGGRAPH, Founding Editor of the
Journal of Graphics Tools, and Editor-in-Chief of ACM
Transactions on Graphics. Glassner wrote and directed the
short animated film “Chicken Crossing,” which premiered
at the SIGGRAPH ‘96 Electronic Theatre, and wrote and
directed the short film “Making Memories”. He designed
the highly participatory Internet game “Dead Air” for The
Microsoft Network, where he wrote and directed the liveaction pilot episode. A popular speaker, Glassner has delivered invited addresses to groups around the world on topics
ranging from computer graphics to storytelling. He is also
a well-known writer, and has published numerous technical papers and books on topics ranging from 3D modeling, rendering, and animation to digital sound synthesis
and interactive storytelling. Glassner created and edited the
popular Graphics Gems series, which has spawned a range
of related books series. He wrote the two-volume text
Principles of Digital Image Synthesis that covers rendering
concepts from physiology to physics. His books Andrew
Glassner’s Notebook, Andrew Glassner’s Other Notebook,
and Morphs, Mallards, and Montages collect his regular
columns that appeared over nine years of IEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications. His book Interactive Storytelling
brings together lessons from computer gaming’s recent past
and offers suggestions for new ways to tell stories using
today’s media. Glassner holds a PhD in Computer Science
from The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He
is now a full-time writer-director, and a consultant in storytelling and interactive fiction to the computer game and
online entertainment industries. He is a Voting Member of
the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. In his spare
time, Andrew paints, plays jazz piano, and hikes.

xii

