EAKOS: VAST 2009
VAST 2009 Flitter Mini Challenge Award: Good use of Competing Hypotheses
Lome Leonard
Penn State University Research Computing & Cyberinfrastructure

ABSTRACT

In this article, I describe the tools and techniques used to generate
competing hypotheses for the VAST 2009 Flitter mini challenge. I
will describe how I approached solving the social networks and
the importance of the geospatial relationships to determine that
"Social Structure Form A" was the best matching social network.
KEYWORDS:
Visual
analytics,
investigative
geovisualization, information visualization.

analysis,

INDEX TERMS: H.5.3 [Information Systems]: Information
Interfaces and Presentation - Group and Organization Interfaces;
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]: User InterfacesEvaluation/methodology; 1.3.6 [Methodology and Techniques]:
Interaction Techniques

1

INTRODUCTION

The goal of this mini challenge was to identify fictitious embassy
employees with possible criminal ring connections who use the
social network "Flitter" to communicate with colleagues. These
criminal connections extend to neighboring fictitious countries as
well. The tools used to answer this mini challenge are part of a
prototype called EAKOS, which aims to integrate a variety of
visualization and reporting techniques. The goal is to develop a
framework that allows users to generate data and visualizations
from web services. As the sole developer of EAKOS, the VAST
mini challenges helped to motivate and improve this framework.
My goal, while developing these tools is to keep the interface as
simple as possible; provide a variety of visualization methods to
view the same datasets and allow users to arrange the interface
into multiple configurations for a variety of side by side
comparisons of query parameters. Using this framework, I
developed three plug-in data visualization tools to address this
challenge: (l) a tool focused on showing thousands of ID
aggregations (2) a query tool with constraints to find key roles in
the social network (3) a mapping tool showing connections
between cities and countries.

2

ApPROACH

To FINDING SOLUTIONS

In the following narrative, I discuss how I used EAKOS plug-ins
to generate competing hypotheses of two social networks that met
the challenge criteria. I approached this challenge by identifying
potential "Fearless leaders", and then using a query tool to
categorize IDs to find network connections as defined in the
challenge questions, followed by mapping the geospatial
relationships to determine the best social network.

e-mail: lorne Ieonardrghotmail.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

2.1
Finding Fearless Leader
To start, I investigated how to eliminate irrelevant IDs from the
6000 provided in the dataset. My first approach was to identify
potential "Fearless leaders" that met both of the social structure
descriptions identified in the mini challenge with a minimum of
100 links. I wanted to quickly prove, or disprove, that the given
social structures were feasible. I coded a very simple Silverlight
visualization web service that aggregates per city and country of
each ID as a bar chart (Figure 1). Not a fancy visualization, but
my goal was to show as many IDs as possible per page (Figure 1
has 600 IDs per tab page), but still be able to investigate all 6000
IDs quickly, with ease and with a minimum number of tab pages.
Using this visualization technique, within five minutes I identified
21 possible "Fearless leaders" that had over 100 links. Then I had
evidence that the two structures were indeed plausible and a list of
possible "Fearless leaders" to further investigate.

- .'- - . . . ...
. . ._e-_"_
.-.-_.. -"'
,

- _ llo-o·_ _

Figure 1. Call links per unique 10 and regions .

2.2
Finding Social Networks
I developed a data query tool that allows me to narrow my search
against the given input parameters. This tool helped me to focus
on a particular strategy to identify possible social structures. I then
re-implemented these queries into one tool so that I could easily
repeat my strategy and search for as many social structures as
possible. I subdivided the query into six components; the first
query narrows the list of IDs that have around 40 contacts, which
describes the potential employee under investigation. The second
query restricts the list further by identifying possible contacts that
are in contact with the employee and have between 30 and 40
contacts. The third component allows users to select with ease the
possible handlers from a drop down list by identifying important
cells with a color. Cells in light red indicate the possible handler,
yellow cells indicate a partial match and orange cells indicate
what IDs are common against the possible handlers with the
selected number of middlemen defined by the user. Then the
results of this query are summarized within the fourth module
drop down list as the possible middleman and their contacts
(Figure 2a). Cells marked in light red are the middleman handlers

265

and orange cells indicate possible leaders or other related contacts.
The fifth component (Figure 2b) lists the possible leaders and
their link count with the remaining component listing the unique
IDs and their country of origin (Figure 2c).

probable that the handlers need to be in the same city as the
employee to pick up intelligence in a short amount of time and to
keep an eye on the employee. Thus, I identified the best social
structure due to this geographic connection as the social network
based on ID 100.

Using this technique, I identified the closest social structure as
"Form A". Two networks closely matched this structure with
employee ID 100 being the best match and employee ID 142 a
close match. ID 100 is the best solution as the middleman "Boris"
(ID 4994) has five contacts in total (matching the challenge
criteria). Three ofthe five contacts are the handlers (193,261,563),
two others are the leader (ID 4 who has 256 contacts) and the
remaining is ID 1612 (Related other). Employee ID 142 is not an
identical match to social structure "Form A" due to the number of
contacts for the middleman ID 4980. There are six contacts in
total, three handlers (38,101,318) and three others (11,2909, and
5977). ID 11 is the leader as the only ID with than 100 links with
a total of 168 links. IDs 2909 and 5977 mean that "Boris" is
communicating not with one other person but with two more
contacts. However, according to the given criteria both could be
considered acceptable answers and it is the geospatial
relationships that define the best answer.
"ddeMa'lCortads

.

4!lS1

A

... '3~
4!lS1

F
~2

•

P"""'Leodeo

~ ""' C«tad'
ID4 Co<rt

B

le. rt~ Cortads

ID

256

11)
1

3
5
8

.

9

C

'- "' I - ~ )

~""' Qooo I_ '

"'_

KaJ
Ka-nw:

9

"""'"

11

"

/

Figure 3. Social network structure based on employee 10 100 and
the three handlers (10 194,261,563) who are located in
Prounov.

Couty

5

10:194

J

KaJ

,3

-'41__ '

10 :100

'~""L~~
='~================

- .......

-

~.L!-]

~ _

.

'iiI

__ •

10: 142

10 :38
/

/

RyDmj
v • .,

Figure 2. Query tool showing cell highlights .

2.3
Geospatial Relationships
Once the user has identified a possible social structure, he or she
can map the results to investigate the number of calls and
percentage of calls made at each city and country. Based on the
employee ID 100 social network structure, the employee and the
three handlers (ID 194,261,563) are located in Prounov (Large
City). The middleman (ID 4994) is situated in Kannvic (MidSized City) and the "Fearless leader" (ID 4) is located at Kouvnic
(Mid-Sized City). Based on the employee ID 142 social structure,
the employee is based in Prounov (Large City). The three handlers
(ID 38,101,318) and the middleman (ID 4980) are all based in
Koul (Large City), and the "Fearless leader" (ID 11) is located at
Ryzkland (Small City). Both networks resemble the criteria of a
target and handler present in a larger city and a middleman in a
nearby smaller location. However, both leaders are not present in
a larger city.

Figure 4. Social network structure based on employee 10 142 who
is based in Prounov and the three handlers (10 38,101,318)
who are located in Koul.

3
In both structures, the "Fearless leader" is close to Flovania's
border, perhaps for an easier escape route and physical exchange
of information/money/drugs. In both cases, the leader has
connections in all cities, with the most connections in the larger
cities. "Boris" the middleman 4994 (based on employee ID 100)
has only two geographic links between the leader's hometown
(Kouvnic) and the handler's location in Prounov. However, this
may cause a problem for "Boris", as it could be more difficult to
keep an eye on his handlers based in another city. "Boris" with ID
4980 (based on employee ID 142) shares the same city as his
handlers. However, in the social structure based on ID 100, the
handlers are in the same city as the employee (Figure 3), but the
social structure based on ID 142 is not (Figure 4). It is more

266

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

As the reviewers commented, it is easy for the user to interact
with the data and test hypotheses due to constrained interactions.
Future development will focus on giving more control to the user
via a flow diagram model network to test hypotheses. I intend to
record the steps as outlined in section 2.2 to produce a model with
a simple interface to transform parameters and then visualize for
the user to do side by side comparisons and investigations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would to like thank the VAST committee, reviewers and my
wife Allison.

