Poster: Visual Prediction of Time Series
Ming C. Hao, *Halldór Janetzko, Ratnesh K. Sharma, Umeshwar Dayal, *Daniel A. Keim, Malu Castellanos
Hewlett-Packard Labs and *University of Konstanz

Figure 1. A pipeline for visual prediction of next day’s power consumption KW from one week’s data in a data center

ABSTRACT
Many well-known time series prediction methods have been used
daily by analysts making decisions. To reach a good prediction,
we introduce several new visual analysis techniques of smoothing,
multi-scaling, and weighted average with the involvement of
human expert knowledge. We combine them into a well-fitted
method to perform prediction. We have applied this approach to
predict resource consumption in data center for next day planning.
1

INTRODUCTION

The motivation for the analysis of a time series is the desire to
predict the likehood of the future based on historical data besides
to find patterns and trends. Data center administrators want to
predict the next day’s power consumption from last month’s data.
A supply chain company needs to predict the number of products
they must store in a warehouse this month from last year sales.
Classic statistical methods for time series prediction are modelbased (e.g., ARIMA and Holt Winters [1], G-TSFE [2]) and
others (smoothing, trend, similarity [3]). Each method has its own
characteristics and applications. Holt Winters is used for seasonal
data, while ARIMA is used for non-seasonal data. Most methods
are heavily dependent on the applications and require expertise to
drive the prediction process.
2

COMBINING NEW IDEAS AND EXISTING METHODS

The goal of our work is to combine existing prediction methods
into a suite of visual analysis techniques to allow the user to steer
the prediction process and produce better prediction results. We
use a multi-scale visualization and a visual accuracy indicator in
combination with standard preprocessing techniques such as
smoothing with moving averages to remove noise from the time
series before applying the prediction methods. We also include a
technique based on weighted averages for predicting one full
day’s data from a monthly time series.

Figure 1 illustrates the overall process pipeline. (A) prediction
methods: ARIMA, Holt Winters, Weighted Average, etc. (B)
moving average slider, (C) visual accuracy indicator, (D) multiscaling, and (E) confidence band for use in the prediction process.
For visual prediction of large volume of data over time, we use
a cell-based high-resolution time series [4] described in section
3.2 in addition to line charts to avoid overplotting.
2.1
Multi-Scaling
Multi-scaling is a visual analysis technique for the user to adjust
the scale between the actual and predicted data as shown in Figure
1(D). For better visibility of the predicted data, users often assign
a small portion of the screen to display the history data in order to
have enough space to show the prediction results. This is essential
since the predicted time frame (one day) is usually smaller than
the history time frame (a week or a month).
2.2
Prediction Visual Accuracy Indicator
An important component of our system is the visual accuracy
indicator shown in Figure 1C. This component is used to show the
quality obtained by the prediction method for all time frames in
the past. To determine the quality values we calculate the
prediction for each time step in the past based on each measured
value occurring before that time step without knowing the actual
value. We normalize the differences between the predicted and
actual values using standard deviation. Then, we map these values
to a color map. Dark colors indicate larger differences; light
colors indicate smaller differences. The red/blue lines indicate that
the actual values are higher/lower respectively than the predicated
value. Figure 1 first shows slightly under-predicted values (light
blue lines), followed by over-predicted values (many red lines).
2.3
Smoothing with Moving Average
In our experiments with the resource consumption in data centers,
in many cases the prediction methods do not provide sufficiently
good results. One reason is that the data is usually very noisy.
Smoothing can help to reduce the negative effects of noise on the
prediction. The moving averages can be computed based on a
varying time interval and therefore, we employ a moving

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

229

Figure 2. Apply smoothing with moving average to ARIMA model to
predict next day’s trend line on data center power consumptions

average slider (Figure 1B) for users to select the time interval.
Figure 2 illustrates the effectiveness of using moving average in
prediction. Figure 2B shows a better trend line (upward) than
Figure 2A (straight line) using the ARIMA model on the original
data.

Figure 3. Two Predictions of Next Day’s Chiller Utilization

early morning and late evening (most green and yellow). This
result helps the administrators plan cooling system utilization for
the next day.

2.4
Weighted Average Prediction
From our experience with existing prediction methods, we found
that very few real-world time series fit the characteristics assumed
by the different models. What is really needed is a method that
combines seasonal and non-seasonal aspects and allow a
prediction of longer periods such as a full day. One way of
obtaining this is to use a weighted average of previous days over
multiple weeks. This allows a useful long term prediction as can
be seen in Figure 3.
3

APPLICATIONS & COMPARISONS

The above methods have been applied with success to real-world
data center thermal prediction for administrators to plan for next
day’s power consumption and the percentage of chiller utilization.
3.1
Visual Prediction Line Charts
Common questions from data center administrators are: what
chiller utilization can I expect tomorrow based on weekly or
monthly chiller data? Which prediction methods show the better
answer?
In comparing Figure 3A (Holt Winters) and Figure 3B
(Weighted Average), the Weighted Average Prediction clearly
shows a better prediction with more confidence than Holt Winters
(more light colored lines and narrower confidence band).
3.2
Visual High Resolution Time Series
Time series used for prediction are often very long. Analysts
usually use one month’s historical thermal data to predict the next
day’s power and chiller utilization. Because of limited screen size,
we use a high-resolution cell-based time series displayed in realtime. In Figure 4, cells (pixels) of each time series are arranged
from bottom to top and left to right according to time. The size of
the cells automatically scales down as more cells are displayed.
The color of a cell is a one-minute measurement value for each
time interval.
Analysts can simultaneously perform predictions on the chiller
and power utilizations using the Holt Winters or Weighted
Average Methods because both usage patterns are seasonal. The
prediction result is shown on day 2008-09-09 in the last row of
Figure 4. The chiller and power is going higher during the day
(hours 10 to 17) and early evening (more red and orange), than

230

Figure 4. Multi-time series predictions on data center resource consumptions
(%chiller utilization and power KW) using Holt Winters Model

4

CONCLUSION

In this poster, we presented a visual analysis of time-series
prediction framework which combines existing methods and
interactive visualizations for real-world data center resource
consumptions. Our weighted average driven prediction method
plays an important role in prediction of daily system usage. Our
future work will analyze local trends and add visual indicators for
high-resolution time series.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

ARIMA and Holt Winters prediction models are described in the
Chatfield, C. The analysis of time series: An Introduction, 6th ed.,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA. 2004.
TSFE Time Series Automated Forecasting Engine. Castellanos, M,
Norman Salazar, N., Fabio Casati, F., Dayal U. Shan M. Int. J.
Computation Science and Engineering, 2000.
Buono, P., et. al. Similarity-Based Forecasting with Simultaneous
Previews: A River Plot Interface for Time Series Forecasting. The
11th International Conference on Information Visualization. 2007.
Hao M., Dayal U., Keim D. A., Schreck T. Multi-Resolution
Techniques for Visual Exploration of Large Time-Series Data.
Proceedings: IEEE VGTC Symposium on Visualization, 2007.

