Architecture as Information Space
Peter Ferschin, Andreas Gramelhofer
Vienna University of Technology – Institute of Architectural Science and Theory
ferschin@iemar.tuwien.ac.at, angram@gmx.net
Abstract
This paper will discuss the relevance of
architectural design towards the field of Information
visualization by showing historical and contemporary
examples of built structures with encoded information.
This overview should demonstrate that information
visualization in three dimensional physical environments
was already created throughout the history of
architecture, even within different cultures. From these
examples some design principles for spatial coding of
information will be extracted that can be transferred to
the field of information visualization. Additionally
architectural principles are related to metaphors from
different fields of knowledge.
Keywords--Information
Visualization,
Information Design, Architecture, Information
Architecture

1. Introduction
The development of faster information processing
tools have also created larger amounts of data to be
processed. While the human being has amazing
capabilities in visual information processing, large
amounts of data in the abstract form of large tables of
numbers and text cannot be analyzed and understood in
short periods of time. Information Visualization as a
scientific discipline tries to generate visual structures
from abstract data types, to achieve a better insight into
complex data structures and also to provide new methods
of interacting with data. So it seems that the visual
encoding of information will be necessary for an
information society to understand the increasing amount
of knowledge produced, and that this approach can be
tracked down to its roots inside computer based
information processing. But when we look back in
history, we realize that visual communication techniques
have a much older history than the history of computing
[21]. Before developing abstract symbols to encode
information, the human being used images to
communicate. Some of these images were created on
walls of caves or inside temples which brings another

area into the discussion of communication media: the
field of architecture. Architecture has also a long
tradition as a cultural achievement, and this paper will
discuss how information has been coded into physically
built structures. The following chapters will introduce
several examples of different fields of knowledge that
have been coded in “books of stone”.
Information

Metaphor

Example

Proportion

Human Body

Proportion
Sacred Knowledge

Music
Path

Le Corbusier, Di
Giorgio Martini,
Schwaller de
Lubicz
Stretto House
Borobudur

Cosmological
Order
Astronomy

Gods,Nature,Man
Instrument

Balinese
Architecture
Observatory, Jaipur

General
Knowledge
Ethnology

Theatre

Memory Theatre

Worldtrip

Museum of
Ethnology, Leiden

Advertisement

Screen

Tokyo

Financial Data

Augmented Space

NYSE, Asymptote

Table 1: Overview of Built Information
Architectures
This should emphasize that architecture has a rich
tradition of creating information spaces, and the term
“information architecture” has also a right to be used
inside the area of architecture, although nowadays it is
mainly used for describing structures of websites. At the
end of the paper, several design principles will be
derived from the introduced examples.

2. Architecture and Human Proportions
One of the most developed fields in architecture is
the relationship of proportions in respect to the human
body. Understanding architecture as a media for
information, human proportions can be derived from
various kinds of buildings. Examples can be found in the
works of Le Corbusier [1], Di Giorgio Martini [2] and
Schwaller de Lubicz [3], thus spanning the history of
architecture from ancient egypt to contempary buildings.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 1 Modulor – Le Corbusier, Cathedrals
and Human Proportions, Egyptian Temple and
Human Proportions
Figure 2 Stretto House by Steven Holl (Bartòk)

3. Architecture and Music
An example of the relationship between music and
architecture is the Stretto House built by Steven Holl in
1991. This building is an architectonic representation of
a piece by Béla Bartòk (Music for Strings, Percussion,
and Celeste). As the four movements of the music
elaborate on the contrast between light (strings) and
heavy (percussion), the architecture consists of four
massive parts connected with light framework.
“Bartòk's Music […] has a materiality in
instrumentation which the architecture approaches in
light and space. Formed in four sections, the building
consists of two modes: heavy orthogonal masonry and
light, curvilinear metal. The main house is aqueous
space: floor planes pull one space to the next, roof planes
pull space over walls and an arched wall pulls light from
a skylight. Materials continue the concept in poured
concrete, cast glass in fluid shapes, slumped glass and
liquid terrazzo.” [4] [5]

4. Symbolic Architecture
An interesting monument of symbolic architecture is
Borobudur, a Buddhist stone-building in Java (Indonesia)
dating back to 760 a.d. The monument consists of 10
concentric terraces (cf. Zikkurat) of diminishing size
with 1460 reliefs and 504 Buddha-statues. Its purpose is
a religious monument, where Buddhists can spiritually
and physically experience the 10 stages of enlightenment
(Bodhisattva). This spiritual transformation is being
translated into a spatial metaphor: Each terrace
represents one of the stages of enlightenment, thus
enabling the visitor to actually experience religious
knowledge in a mnemonic manner. Another symbolic
shape is encoded in the floorplan, that has been designed
in correspondence of a buddhist mandala. The general
shape of Borobudur reminds of a mountain, which is a
major religious symbol in various cultures (cf. Bali,
Ayres Rock). [6] [7]

Figure 3 Buddhistic Monument of Borobudur
(Java)

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

5. Cosmological Architecture
The principles of architecture in Bali are derived
from a social and cosmological system.
While
mountains and upper regions are dedicated to gods,
lower regions are assigned to humans, the sea to demons
and evil spirits. This trichotomy can be found in the
topology of villages and cities, but it also reappears in
the design of a single house or the composition of details.
The hierarchy is reflected in the human body (head,
body, leg) as a metaphor. A second principle of Balinese
architecture is cosmological order. Two main axes are
created through the orientation towards the holy
mountain (Mount Agung) on one side and the path of the
sun (East-West) on the other. Cities and villages as well
as temples and houses are oriented along these cardinalaxes. Thus the holy part of a Balinese house is built
towards Mount Agung, the dwelling part is in the middle
and the profane parts (kitchen, hog house) are oriented in
the direction of the sea.
The path through a house or temple is also very
important. The chronology of construction (from the
sacred parts towards the profane) and the process of
entering a house (from the profane towards the sacred
parts) or a religious ritual are related to each other. [8]
[9]

Figure 4 Architectural Principles in Bali

6. Architecture as Astronomical Device

Figure 5 observatory of Jai Singh II in Jaipur

7. The Memory Theatre
Giulio Camillo Delmino’s concept of a Memory
Theatre (approx. 1550 a.d.) is an architectural
representation of the knowledge of his time. Standing on
a stage, the visitor could survey seven different
categories of knowledge situated in the auditorium and
badged with allegoric images. The concept is based on
three principles:
Spatial experience is more comprehensive than
abstract information. Explicit facts are easier to
remember.
Spatial concepts possess immanent logic, which can
be used to mnemonically link information.
The exploration of a building creates a linear
sequence; many different paths through one space are
possible, each time creating a different sequence from
one source.
In this sense Camillo’s design is a prototype of
information architecture. [13] [14]

Similar to Balinese architecture, historical buildings
in India are also influenced by social or religious
principles. Especially the observatory of Jai Singh II in
Jaipur (1730 a.d.) is an example of architecture as an
astronomical device.
All buildings were designed according to the
astronomical and physical science of the time and were
used for measuring and displaying astronomical facts
like azimuth and zenith, rise and decline of stars. The
buildings are instruments and scientific monuments at
the same time, again information can be experienced in a
spatial context, whereby light plays a special role in the
architectural design. [10] [11] [12]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 7 Memory Theatre – Giulio Camillo

8. Museums as Memory Theatre
The concept of memory theatre as a spatial
mnemonic technique dates back to the Middle Ages, and
was later pursued in the Renaissance by Giulio Camillo
(1480-1544), Ramon Lull (1235-1316), Giordano Bruno
(1548-1600), Peter Ramus (1515-1572) and Robert
Fludd (1574-1637).
A modern example of memory theatre is the
National Museum of Ethnology in Leiden, Netherlands.
Originally designed as a hospital, the building has been
adapted in 1996 to become a modern museum with a
flexible topology of showrooms.
The basic idea is a thread around the globe, which
links the different cultures and continents together. In
this way a topology-concept is created as a
representation of a historical excurse into human culture.
The two stories of the building contain different
exhibition-areas, which are laid out according to the
imaginary thread around the globe in a graphic
projection of continents on the floor plan. [15] [16]

displaying various information. Images or Videos are
being projected on facades, texts are engraved in glassor concrete, variable lighting is used to visualize current
environment parameters like wind or temperature.
Examples of this technique can be found in
advertisement tables or video screens, which dominate
many urban spaces of modern cities (cf. Tokyo). [17]

Figure 9 Videoscreens in Tokyo

10. Augmented Architecture
An important part of information architecture is the
combination of physical and virtual content. The aim is
to design an architectural (physical) structure, which acts
as a representation of virtual/abstract data in itself. Here
architecture gains a transcendental quality, linking the
physical world (e.g. of a room) to abstract information
(e.g. the metaphysical).
An example of augmented architecture is
Asymptote’s design for the Advanced Command Center
(ACC) of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). The
ACC contains a great number of flatscreens and
electronic tickers embedded in a curved structure of blue
translucent glass, which forms the overall-frame and
underlines the metaphor of floating information.
Additionally Asymptote designed a virtual
representation of the NYSE, which acts as a real-time
interactive 3D-model of the trading floor. The idealized
simplification of the actual room enables brokers to
visualize great amounts of real-time data: Virtual rooms
can be used to create different scales or perspectives of
trading information, market- or cash flows are presented
spatially and linked to other recorded data, giving the
user the opportunity to manipulate abstract data in an
intuitive way according to his needs. [18] [19]
Figure 8 National Museum of Ethnology
Leiden,NL

9. Architecture as Presentation Media
While information architecture frequently deals with
the spatial representation of information, architecture as
presentation media uses buildings as surfaces for

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 10 New York Stock Exchange –
Asymptote

Conclusions
From the architectural examples, described in the
article above, several design principles can be observed
through these historic and contempory examples.
Information
Architecture
Metaphors from
other disciplines

Information
Visualization
Transfer
Metaphors to
InfoVis
Consult
specialists

Metaphors from
other disciplines
Path

Constrained
Navigation
Use Sound

Music
Natural Light
(Sun, Stars)
Time

Use Light

Mnemotechnic

Mnemotechnic
Aesthetic Design

Viewing
Directions

Symbols

Speed of
Navigation,
Change of
Information,
Transitions
Layout of
Spaces,
Characteristic
Spaces, Identity
InfoVis as
Learning Tool
“Joy of Use”,
Encourage
Exploration
Specific
(predefined)
Camera
positions
Use Visual
Language

Examples
Human Body, Music, Theatre,
Instrument, Cosmos, Symbol
Anatomists, Musicians,
Architects, Industrial
Designers, Symbol. Experts
“Path to Enlighgtment”,
Procession, Worldtrip
Harmony, Contrast (“Error”
Sound, “Completion” Sound)
Observatory, Theatre
Observatory, Procession,
Paths

visualization itself used architectural metaphors
(perspective walls, information landscapes, etc.) which
could be explored with a deeper meaning if architects are
consulted in the design process.
Another important factor in built information
architecture is time, which can be experienced as
sequence of spaces, by a path through a building, or by
observing special qualities at specific moments of time
as in the astronomic example. This sequence of spaces
includes another visualization goal, where visualized
information can be used with mnemotechnic intentions,
as it was done in the memory theatre and museum
exhibitions. Additionally aesthetic qualities of spatial
design can help to encourage the user to explore the data
by increasing the “Joy Factor” for investigation. The
example of symbolic architecture motivates to use design
capabilities for encoding semantic information in
specific shapes (as meditative symbols encourage
contemplation), that are used inside a visualization. From
a design point of view this results in seeing information
as an additional dimension of design [20].
As a future extension of built architecture,
interactive environments should be considered as part of
an architectural design as it was done at the NYSE and
other augmented spaces like CAVE environments.
Thus, information visualization should increasingly
cooperate with other design disciplines, and as it was
shown in this paper, especially the field of architecture
might be a rich source for common future developments.

References
[1]

Memory Theatre, City with
Monuments

[2]
Memory Theatre, Museum of
Ethnology
Memory Theatre, Borobudur,
Churches, Arch. Monuments,
Museums, Exhibitions
Memory Theatre, Observatory

Mandala (Meditation),
Borobudur, Churches

Table 2: Design Principles
Architecture has been used to encode knowledge
from various other fields with different metaphors as
three-dimensional design. By transferring these
metaphors (human body, music, symbols, path,
instrument, etc.) to information visualization some new
designs might be created in a similar way. The examples
presented in this paper should be a motivation to
investigate further inside the field of architecture, as
many architectural designs have used metaphors from
other disciplines. It should be mentioned that information

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

Le Corbusier: Der Modulor. Band 1. Darstellung
eines in Architektur und Technik allgemein
anwendbaren
harmonischen
Maßes
im
menschlichen Maßstab. Stuttgart, 1998
P. v. Naredi-Rainer: Architektur und Harmonie.
Köln, 1982
Schwaller de Lubicz, R. A.: The Temple of Man.
Inner Traditions International, 1998
Holl, Steven: Stretto House. New York, 1996
Steven Holl url: http://www.stevenholl.com
Miksic, John / Tranchini, Marcello: Borobudur.
Golden Tales of the Buddhas. London, 1990
Borobudur url: http://www.borobudur.tv/
Oka Windhu, I. B.: Balinese Traditional
Architecture. Department of Education and
Culture. Republic of Indonesia, 1977
Swellengrebel, Jan L.: Bali Studies, Life,
Thoughts, and Rituals. The Hague - Bandung,1960
Volwahsen, Andreas: Cosmic Architecture in
India. The Astronomical Monuments of Maharaja
Jai Singh II. München [u.a.], 2001
Stierlin, Henri (HG.): Architektur der Welt: Indien.
Köln, 1993
Stierlin, Henri / Stierlin, Anne: Hinduistisches
Indien. Tempel und Heiligtümer von Khajuraho
bis Madurai. Köln [u.a.], 2002
Camillo, Giulio: L'idea del theatro. Fiorenza,
(Lorenzo Torrentino), 1550

[14] Memory Theatre url:
http://www.ba.infn.it/~zito/camillo.html
[15] Staal, Gert / de Rijk, Martijn: Redesigning the
National Museum of Ethnology Leiden, The
Netherlands. Amsterdam, 2003
[16] National
Museum
of
Ethnology
url:
http://www.rmv.nl/
[17] Meyhöfer,
Dirk:
Contemporary
Japanese
Architects. Köln [u.a.], 1994
[18] Asymptote Architecture url:
http://www.asymptote-architecture.com/
[19] New York Stock Exchange url:
http://www.nyse.com/
[20] Illera, Christa: Trilogie der Fünf. Fünf
Dimensionen, fünf Prinzipien, fünf Phänomene.
Wien, 2003
[21] E.R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire,
CT, Graphics Press. 1990.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

