A Method for Interactive Graph Manipulation
Jukka Raisamo, Roope Raisamo, Päivi Kärkkäinen
Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction (TAUCHI)
Department of Computer Sciences, FIN-33014 University of Tampere, Finland
{jr@cs.uta.fi, rr@cs.uta.fi, paivi.j.karkkainen@uta.fi}
Abstract
As structured graphs are widely used in various
application areas for conceptual modeling, the need for
interactive layout adjusting methods is clearly recognized
in the domain of graph drawing applications. In this
paper, we present a graph manipulation method where
the process of adjusting and manipulating graphs is
broken down into a group of direct and interactive tools.
The tools are visualized as large tool-specific mouse
cursors that are easily adjustable. Colors and
highlighting are used to identify different tools and their
operating ranges.
According to the usability studies, the tools proved to
be reasonably easy to use with only a short introductory
time. The users could also select appropriate tools for
each manipulation task without problems and were
satisfied with the functionality as well as the visualization
of the tools. The usefulness of the tools in manipulating
graph drawings was also recognized.

1. Introduction
The development of graph manipulation tools
addresses the problem of constructing geometric
representations of different kind of graph drawings that
are widely used, for example, in software engineering,
database systems, visual interfaces, and computer-aided
design. Both automatic and manual methods have
weaknesses of their own: the automatic methods often
lack proper user interaction while the manual ones are
inefficient when arranging large number of objects. In
order to avoid these disadvantages, Misue et al. [3] have
addressed a need for graph manipulation methods that
make it possible to rearrange a particular region of the
graph drawing while not changing the layout too widely
and confusing the mental map of the user.
Some solutions have been designed where the
automatic methods have been made more interactive by,
for example, interactively adjustable constraints [8] or by
applying constraints with automatic graph layout

algorithms [1]. Contrary to these approaches, we prefer
providing the manual methods with the automatic
assisting features in order to give the user maximum
control through interaction. To be able to achieve this, we
have applied the principles of direct manipulation [9] in
our method.
This work was launched by Raisamo and Räihä who
introduced a new direct manipulation tool called the
alignment stick that was designed to align drawing
objects linearly in object-oriented drawing programs [5].
The alignment stick was visualized as a large stick-shaped
mouse cursor that provided linear alignment by pushing
the objects against the surface of the tool while it was
dragged on the canvas. The operating range of the tool
was fully controlled by the user that could, in addition to
moving the tool, also freely adjust the length and angle of
it. In addition to the intuitiveness of use, the alignment
stick removed one step from the alignment process
compared with the traditional command-based alignment
tools by integrating the selection and alignment in a single
operation.
In an empirical experiment the alignment stick was
compared to two kinds of command-based alignment
tools controlled with a menu and a palette [6]. The study
pointed out that the metaphor of the tool was understood
even by the most novice users. The results still pointed
out that although the alignment stick was a useful tool, it
still needed further development to succeed in more
complex alignment operations
Robbins et al. [7] introduced a very similar tool to the
alignment stick that they called the broom alignment tool.
The basic functionality of the tool is more limited
compared to the alignment stick: the tool only works in
orthogonal directions, the direction of the tool is decided
when the tool activated and the length of the tool can only
be increased during the operation. In addition to the
functionality of the original alignment stick, the broom
alignment tool makes it possible to select the distribution
of the aligned objects from three fixed modes and undo
the operation by dragging the tool back to its original
position.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Our method presented in this paper provides the user
with a well-designed set of direct graph manipulation
tools. The method contains appropriate tools for all the
conventional graph manipulation tasks and the user can
freely choose the order of applying each tool. The
research presented in this paper is continuation for our
previous study where earlier versions of some of the
interactive tools were introduced [4]. The tools combine
the freedom of manual interaction with the assistance of
automatic features where different kinds of visualizations
are used to indicate the operating ranges of the tools and
to help the user to better distinguish them from each
other.
The main contribution of this paper is to present a
graph drawing method that is thoroughly interactive but
still efficient. In addition to this, we also present the
results of a usability study done with the manipulation
tools.

aligning the objects they can be aligned in two
dimensions (resizing stick) or moved freely (alignment
stick and arc, distribution sticks).
2.1.1. Alignment stick and alignment arc. The
alignment stick [5] (Figure 1, on the left) allows linear
alignment by pushing the objects with the tool. The user
can control the operating range of the tool by moving the
tool cursor as well as by adjusting the length and angle of
it. The simple stick metaphor of the tool is familiar to
many users from the real world. Only one of the longer
edges of the tool can be active and used to select the
objects at a time and it is visualized with a thicker black
edge to the user. The active edge is determined by the
direction of movement of the tool and it is fixed after the
first object has been selected.

2. The interactive graph manipulation
method
Our interactive tools can be divided into two
categories on the basis of their functionality: alignment
tools and managing tools. The tools are direct in
accordance with the definition for the concept [9], making
it possible for the user to interactively manipulate the
graph drawing in real time.
The application provides a toolbar from which the
user can select an appropriate manipulation tool that
remains active until the next one is selected. The
metaphors of the tools are designed to resemble real
world tools. Generally, each tool is visualized as a large
tool-specific mouse cursor that is activated by pressing
the left mouse button down and deactivated by releasing
it. The sizes of the tools can be interactively adjusted
whether the tools are active or inactive by dragging the
mouse with the right mouse button pressed down. Also
the orientation of most of the tools can be adjusted by
dragging the mouse with the middle button down.

2.1. Alignment tools
The alignment tools include the alignment stick, the
alignment arc, the resizing stick, the distribution sticks,
and the alignment ellipse. The objects that are being
manipulated with the tools are highlighted with a dark
gray color to indicate the operating range of the tools. The
aligned objects can also be grouped after which the
alignment tools can be applied to object groups making it
possible to manipulate larger areas of drawing preserving
their internal relations.
All the alignment tools, excluding the alignment
ellipse, provide an orthogonal alignment function by
default where the objects are aligned in only one
dimension. By pressing the CTRL-key down when

Figure 1 Alignment stick on the left and
alignment arc on the right
The alignment arc [4] (Figure 1, on the right) was
designed to align objects non-linearly while the alignment
stick provided only linear alignment. Both the height and
width of the arc can be adjusted, and the angle of the tool
can also be changed freely before or during the operation.
With both of these alignment tools, the tool can grab
the objects based on their borders. The selected objects
are highlighted with darker gray color (Figure 1). In
addition to the use of the CTRL-key, also non-orthogonal
angles of the tools override the orthogonal alignment
function after which the objects can be moved in both
dimensions.
2.1.2. Resizing stick. The resizing stick tool, originally
introduced as the shrinking stick tool [4], allows the user
to align the objects by adjusting their sizes by pushing
and dragging them with the tool (Figure 2). The
visualization of the operation as well as the selection of
the objects is similar to the alignment stick.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

distance between the aligned objects in pixels is shown
under the tool cursor (a magnified view seen in Figure 4).

Figure 2 The objects are resized with the resizing
stick (in both dimensions on the right)
The resizing stick tool makes it possible to
simultaneously manipulate the sizes of several objects –
an operation that normally requires the selection and
resizing of all the objects one by one. Like the alignment
stick, the active edge of the tool is determined and
visualized in the similar way and fixed after the first
object is selected. Also here the CTRL-key as well as
non-orthogonal angles of the tools override the orthogonal
alignment function making it possible to resize the objects
in both dimensions (Figure 2, on the right).
2.1.3. Distribution sticks. The distribution stick (Figures
3 and 4) is designed for both aligning and distributing the
objects linearly. It was considered better to divide the
distribution operations based on center points (Figure 3)
of the objects and bounds (Figure 4) of the objects into
two separate tools rather than to overload a single tool
with alternative modes of functionality. The active edge
of the distribution sticks is fixed. Since the main
operation of this tool is to distribute the objects, only 90°
rotation is normally necessary to allow horizontal or
vertical distribution. The orthogonal alignment function
of these tools can be overridden with the CTRL-key to
allow movement in both directions.

Figure 4 The objects are aligned with the bound
distribution stick (a magnified view)
2.1.4. Alignment ellipse. The alignment ellipse (Figure 5)
makes it easy to arrange objects in circular form around
the center object. The operating range of the tool reaches
on the objects that are directly in relation with the one in
the center of the ellipse-shaped tool cursor. The operating
range of the tool is visualized to the user as the tool is
moved over the objects. After the tool is activated, it
automatically aligns and distributes all the related objects
around the tool cursor. The height and width of the tool
can be adjusted either before or during the manipulation
process where the locations of the objects will be updated
in real time. The orthogonal alignment functionality is not
implemented for this tool, so the tool can be both adjusted
and moved freely in both dimensions.

Figure 5 A cluster of objects is aligned and
moved with the alignment ellipse

2.2. Managing tools

Figure 3 The objects are aligned and distributed
with the center distribution stick
The distribution sticks work basically just like the
alignment stick but also the distances between the aligned
objects can be adjusted by adjusting the length of the tool.
The objects hit with the tool are added in the operation
based on their center points that are compared with those
of the objects being already aligned. After a new object is
added into the operation, the length of the stick remains
the same and the distances between the aligned objects
are decreased to meet the new circumstances. The

The managing tools contain three different kinds of
tools, the delete tool, the grabbing tool and the copy tool.
The tools are instantiated in three interactively adjustable
shapes: an ellipse, a rectangle and a triangle. The shapes
can be resized and rotated. Each type of the tools has
easily recognizable colors and the operating range of the
tools is visualized by highlighting the objects under the
tool with the color of the tool.
2.2.1. Grabbing tool The grabbing tool integrates the
selection and moving operations and enables the user to
grab objects into another position (Figure 6). Compared
with the traditional selection rectangle that can be

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

dragged with the cursor in many applications, the
grabbing tool is slightly simpler to use: it integrates the
selection step with the moving of the objects, and its
operating range is more controllable because the height
and width of the tool cursor can easily be readjusted.

with the red color are deleted unless the operation range
of the tool is redefined by adjusting the size or angle of
the tool, or undone by resizing or dragging the cursor
outside the selected objects before releasing the mouse
button. The delete operation can be undone also by
pressing down the SHIFT-key before releasing the mouse
button. The delete tool integrates the process of deleting
objects into a single delete operation the range of which is
clearly visualized and that can be easily adjusted and
undone.

Figure 6 Group of objects is being cut off and
moved with the rectangle shaped grabbing tool
The grabbing tool visualizes its operating range by
highlighting the objects that are under the tool cursor with
the dark gray color. As the tool is activated, the selected
objects can be dragged into a new position while their
relations are maintained. If the CTRL-key is pressed
down before activating the tool, the tool deletes all the
outside relations (Figure 6, on the right).
2.2.2. Copy tool The copy tool is quite similar to the
grabbing tool but instead of just grabbing objects, the
copy tool duplicates objects inside its light green colored
cursor and grabs the copies that remain highlighted with
the green color until the tool is deactivated (Figure 7).
The tool can discard all the outside relations of the copied
objects with the CTRL-key pressed down before
activating the tool. The tool provides also an easy way to
undo the copy operation by pressing down the SHIFT-key
before releasing the mouse button. The copy tool
simplifies the process of copying objects and relocating
the copies into a single operation the area of which is
easily adjustable.

Figure 8 Two objects are deleted with the delete
tool

3. User study
Before conducting the actual usability study, we
carried out a pilot study with nine users to find problems
with the tools. By observing the pilot users, we found out
that the visualizations of some of the tools were not
obvious to all the users and that the operating ranges of
the tools should be more clearly visualized. Also some
problematic issues in the function of the tools were
recognized. The tools used in the main usability study and
presented in this paper are the improved versions making
use of the findings of the pilot study.
The usability study was carried out with nine
university students between 22 and 24 years old. All of
the users had a strong experience in using computers, on
average 4.3 in a Likert scale from 1 to 5. The users had
previously used at least some graph drawing applications
but most of them only rarely. Only one of them had
previously used some kind of direct graph manipulation
tools. The tests were conducted in a usability laboratory
and were videotaped for more specific analysis.

3.1. Tests

Figure 7 Two objects are being copied (left) and
moved (right) with the copy tool
2.2.3. Delete tool The delete tool deletes the objects that
are inside the tool cursor (Figure 8). The tool highlights
the objects inside its operating range when it is moved on
the canvas. When the user activates the tool by pressing
the left mouse button down, all the objects highlighted

Before each test, the direct manipulation tools were
briefly introduced to the users. The users also had a
possibility to try out the tools for a short period of time. In
each task, the users were supposed to manipulate the
given drawing until they thought it matched the example
that was given to them on the paper. The outcome of each
task was saved for further analysis.
Figures 9 and 10 represent two examples of the tasks
the users completed during the test where the original
drawing on the left should be manipulated to match the

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

example given on the right. In task 2 (Figure 9), the user
was supposed to align the objects and make their
distances equal using the bound-distribution stick while in
task 11 (Figure 10), a wider variety of tools were needed
to manipulate the drawing.

Figure 9 The second task – the original drawing
on the left and the example result on the right

Figure 10 The last task in the test
The purpose of the test was to find out how the users
experienced the use of the tools, and would they learn to
use them effectively. One goal was also to find out how
the users utilized the features of different tools and were
able to find the ideal tool for each task. There was also a
traditional arrow-shaped selection tool in the application
but it was not introduced to the users and they were
especially asked to use the direct manipulation tools.
The test took an average of about 20 minutes per
user. After the test, the users filled in a questionnaire form
where they were asked information about their
background in computer science and 14 statements about
their opinions on the tools, the tasks, and the overall
software. The users also had the opportunity to write
comments about the tools and the application in general.

3.2. Results
The users succeeded well in choosing the right tool
for each task, except in tasks where resizing stick and
grabbing tools were needed. Instead of changing object
sizes with the resizing stick tool, some of the users
removed the objects and copied a more suitable sized
object to replace the removed ones. Also, instead of using
the grabbing tool, the users often used copy and delete
tools. Some of the users moved the objects also with the
pointer tool against the instructions given to them before
the test.

The users selected the right tool from the toolbar
fluently; only in a few cases the user selected a wrong
tool but corrected the selection immediately after seeing
the tool on the canvas. For example, copy and grabbing
tools were sometimes wrongly selected, but the color of
the tools made it easy for users to notice that the tool was
wrong. In these tools, the users chose equally both often
rectangular-shaped and ellipse-shaped versions.
According to the tests, the direct manipulation tools
turned out to be reasonably easy to use. The users quickly
understood how the tools should be used and succeeded in
almost every task to use them in the right way. However,
the tests pointed out also some minor problems in the
functionality of the tools.
Most of the problems occurred in using the
distribution sticks. There were two kinds of problems:
first, the order of the objects changed, and second, the
objects were distributed too widely. The first problem
occurred especially when the users tried to align objects
that were not related to the same parent object: the objects
were aligned in the order the stick hit them and
sometimes their locations were mixed and the objects
were displaced under the wrong parent. This was because
the tool is not designed to work in those situations. Most
of the subjects ended up with aligning the leaf objects of
only one node at a time as expected, and then there were
no problems.
The other problem was that the subjects tried to align
objects with too wide a cursor when the objects were
spread widely along the stick. Eventually all the subjects
figured it out that the distances of the objects depend on
the length of the stick but the size of the tool was quite
difficult to change while the left button was already
pressed. The feature of visualizing the operating range of
the tools by changing the color of the objects under the
range of the tool was found to help the users.
Some results of the questionnaire are represented in
Figure 11. The users were the most unanimous in their
opinions (a minimum rating of 4) that they were very
motivated to use the tools in manipulating graph drawings
(Figure 11: user satisfaction, an average of 4.6) and that
the tools functioned similarly to each other (functional
similarity of the tools, 4.3). The users also stated that they
understood easily the functional idea of the tools (logical
functionality of the tools, 4.2) and that the tools were easy
to use (ease of the tool usage, 3.9). The tools were also
considered as very suitable in manipulating graph
drawings (suitability for graph manipulation, 4.4) and
most of the users also thought that the tools were natural
to use (naturalness of the tool usage, an average of 3.7
and a median of 4). The least positive the users were
about things that were not related to the functionality of
the tools but the usability of the program, like the icons of
the toolbar buttons (an average of 3.1).

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

5

4

3

2

1

0

EASE OF THE
TOOL USAGE

LOGICAL
FUNCTIONAL
FUNCTIONALITY SIM ILARITY OF
OF THE TOOLS
THE TOOLS

SUITABILITY
FOR GRAPH
MANIPULATION

USER
SATISFACTION

NATURALNESS
OF THE TOOL
USAGE

Figure 11 Subjective opinions on the statements
related to the interactive tools.

4. Discussion
Our graph manipulation method is in practice an
extension to the direct positioning: in our method a
number of objects can simultaneously be manipulated
with the interactive tools that contain features to help the
user to achieve a better layout. Contrary to the traditional
command-based alignment tools, our direct manipulation
tools do not require a separate selection step of the objects
to be aligned, but they affect all the objects hit with the
tool. In this way, the tools can be used to manipulate only
the selected parts of the drawing and to help the user to
better maintain his or her mental map compared with the
sudden and major changes that most of the automatic
layout algorithms cause.
The method presented in this paper can be applied to
editing several different kinds of structured drawings. It
can also be applied to larger drawings by first using the
tools locally for individual objects, then grouping them,
and using the tools again for manipulating the groups of
objects. The method provides more interaction compared
to the systems of Ryall et al. [8] and Böhringer and
Newbery Paulisch [1]. The method also covers all the
common operations needed in graph manipulation while
the broom alignment tool of Robbins et al. [7] only
provides the linear alignment and an option for fixed
distribution of objects. The conventional graph drawing
applications, for example Microsoft Visio, only offer the
user less interactive but more complex command-based
tools for aligning objects.
While the visualizations of the alignment tools are
derived from the original alignment stick [5], the visual
outlook of the managing tools appears somewhat like
those of the see-through interface introduced by Bier et
al. [2]. Both the managing tools and see-through interface
include semitransparent interactive tools that provide
visual feedback. Similarly to the see-through interface,
also our tools are able to simplify the operation, as well as

reduce cursor motion and errors in graph manipulation by
visualizing the function to the user.
The user study pointed out that the users learned
easily to use the tools in the right way but still minor
changes to the functionalities of some of the tools were
needed. The slight problem in changing the size or angle
of the tool at the same time as carrying out the operation
can easily be solved by adding a second pointing device
to control these secondary properties of the tools with the
non-dominant hand. This separates the manual tasks for
both hands and removes the need for pressing several
mouse buttons at the same time. This style of interaction
was used in the original alignment stick and it was proved
to be intuitive and usable [6], but implementation
constraints in the Java environment that we used
prevented us from using the second pointing device in the
present study. Nevertheless, the graph manipulation tools
were proved to be both easy and logical to use and
especially the visualizations of the operating ranges of the
tools were found useful by the users.
Based on the tests, the tools have proved their worth
in graph drawing tasks. Next it would be interesting to
conduct a study comparing them with other drawing
applications to see if the tools improve graph
manipulation efficiency and ease of use compared with
the traditional methods offered by commercial graph
drawing applications.

5. Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a new method for
graph manipulation that makes the whole graph
manipulation process interactive. The method consists of
a set of interactive graph manipulation tools each of
which is responsible for a tool-specific manipulation
operation. The tools are intuitive to use and they are
visualized as large and interactive tool-specific mouse
cursors. All the tools visualize their operating ranges to
help the user to better see the current action.
The tools were evaluated by nine users who found
them very suitable in graph drawing tasks. The users were
also highly motivated to use these tools in manipulating
graph drawings and understood the functionality of the
tools well. The user studies gave us a strong argument for
the present number and functionality of the tools.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Academy of Finland
(grant 104805). We thank all the people who have
participated in the evaluation and development of this
software.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Karl-Friedrich Böhringer, and Frances Newbery Paulisch.
Using Constraints to Achieve Stability in Automatic
Graph Layout Algorithms. In Proceedings of CHI 1990.
ACM Press, 43-51, 1990.
Eric A. Bier, Maureen C. Stone, Ken Pier, William
Buxton and Tony D. DeRose. Toolglass and Magic
Lenses: The See-Through Interface. In Proceedings of
Siggraph 1993. Computer Graphics Annual Conference
Series, ACM Press, 73-80, 1993.
Kazuo Misue, Peter Eades, Wei Lai and Kozo Sugiyama.
Layout Adjustment and the Mental Map. Journal of
Visual Languages and Computing 6, 195-209, 1995.
Jukka Raisamo and Roope Raisamo. A Set of Intuitive
and Interactive Tools for Graph Manipulation. In
Proceedings of APCHI 2002, Vol. 2. Science Press, 754764, 2002.
Roope Raisamo and Kari-Jouko Räihä. A New Direct
Manipulation Technique for Aligning Objects in Drawing
Programs. In Proceedings of UIST 1996. ACM Press,
157-164, 1996.
Roope Raisamo and Kari-Jouko Räihä. Design and
Evaluation of the Alignment Stick. Interacting with
computers 12, 483-506, 2000.
Jason Robbins, Michael Kantor and David Redmiles.
Sweeping Away Disorder with the Broom Alignment
Tool. In Extended Abstracts of CHI 1999. ACM Press,
250-251, 1999.
Kathy Ryall, Joe Marks, and Stuart Shieber. An
Interactive Constraint-Based System for Drawing Graphs.
In Proceedings of UIST 1997. ACM Press, 97-104, 1997.
Ben Shneiderman. The Future of Interactive Systems and
the Emergency of Direct Manipulation. Behaviour and
Information Technology 1, 237-256, 1982.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

