A Combination of Quantitative and Qualitative Maps in an Evaluative
Bibliometric Context
R.K. Buter∗, E.C.M. Noyons and A.F.J. Van Raan
Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS)
Leiden University
The Netherlands
{buter,noyons,vanraan}@cwts.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract
Maps of science provide visualizations of scientific
knowledge domains by quantitatively grouping elements
from scientific papers. In evaluative bibliometric studies
these quantitative maps have proven a useful tool. Representation schemes such as mental maps or cognitive maps
provide a tool to structure qualitative reasoning about, for
instance, strategies, learning and politics. A combination
of bibliometric maps with these qualitative structures may
provide new ways for attacking science-policy related problems using bibliometric data. A design is presented on how
to create, visualize and use the correspondence between elements in both types of maps.

1

Introduction

In the quantitative study of science, which is also known
as scientometrics or (if focused on literature data) bibliometrics, ‘maps of science’ provide overviews of structures
existing within science fields. Of course, what the structures being depicted in these maps represent, depends on
the elements used to built them. For example, maps built
from words or phrases (see for example [3], [12], [4]) taken
from scientific papers provide an overview of the wordusage in these papers; while maps built from references between, say, journals provide an overview of the usage of
papers in (and relative to) these journals (see for a recent
application [14]). These maps both aid the understanding
of the structures within the field, as well as provide a finer
level of detail to the bibliometric statistics by distributing
these over the elements in the map. The structures shown
in these maps have a quantitative basis, which is usually the
co-occurrence data of the selected words, phrases or references. This data is used to position related items together in
∗ Corresponding

author.

the map, sometimes after being clustered into larger structures.
More or less complementary to the procedures in information visualization and bibliometrics, a host of (diagrammatic, mostly network-based) representation schemes has
been developed, going by names such as ‘mental maps’,
‘mind maps’ and ‘cognitive maps’. The structures created
using these schemes are usually from the hand of a limited
number of analysts and depict qualitative reasoning about
some kind of problem matter. The resulting structures can
be analyzed and used as an inference tool. Examples of the
problem matter being analyzed include (the mapping of):
strategies [9], organizational learning [15] and international
politics [17].
In this paper we present our first design of an application
that combines bibliometric maps and the structures or maps
resulting from qualitative reasoning schemes. We expect
that such a tool will help the interpretation of the map and
(subsequently) the communication of its contents. Additionally, we hope that more complex science-policy related
problems and issues can be tackled successfully using bibliometric evaluation.
To avoid confusion about what type of map we refer
to, we will in general discussions use the adjectives ‘qualitative’ and ‘quantitative’ to differentiate between the two
types of maps and to stress the nature of the respective structures on display. In examples and discussions about the use
of maps in the context of bibliometric evaluation we will
still use the term ‘bibliometric map’.
The reader should note that the work presented here is
being implemented at the moment we write this. This is reflected by the fact that the paper is in many parts less clear
than it would have been if we had presented a ready implementation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, in
section 2 we elaborate further on our motivation. After that,
in section 3 we present our design. We shortly mention pre-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

vious work and remarks about the creation of qualitative
structures in sections 3.1 and 3.2. Then we will centralize
the discussion around the creation of the correspondence
between the maps in section 3.3. The use of the combination is dealt with briefly in section 3.4. Section 4 ends this
paper with some concluding remarks.

not have to keep both structures (the conceptual structure
and the application of it onto the bibliometric map) exclusively in mind anymore. As a result we hope that the way of
attacking the problem using bibliometric data is enhanced
and made easier.

3
2

Design

Motivation
3.1

We have used two-dimensional maps of science in a
number of evaluative studies, mostly for science-policy related purposes: see for example [13], or www.cwts.nl/
ec-coe for a public, interactive result of such a study. We
even have a complete analytical application built around
these maps, which we presented in [2].
With the results of these evaluative studies certain types
of science-policy related problems can be attacked. For example, resource allocation can be helped by comparing the
production and impact of knowledge in the same map.
The maps we built in these projects are usually built using Noun Phrases (NPs) extracted from the titles and abstracts of the papers we collected for evaluation. A semiautomatically created subset of these NPs are clustered using their co-occurrence in papers and the clusters are given
coordinates using multi-dimensional scaling. The clusters
are given the name of the most frequent NP in the cluster.
For example, the map shown in Figure 1 is part of the result of an evaluation study of (part of) the field ‘Nanotechnology’ and shows the distribution of impact of a particular
actor in the field. In this figure, the area of a circle represents the number of papers associated with it and the colouring of the surface visualizes the distribution of the impact of
the actor. With the aid of this colouring the user can easily
infer that especially the papers in the cluster labeled quantum dot receive a high impact.
The use of such a bibliometric tool is, akin to the information retrieval tools mentioned in [8] and [1], part of a
problem solving process. But its usefulness depends both
on a proper understanding of the problem as well as the tool
given to solve the problem. And especially the latter is currently a problem in the use of maps as part of a bibliometric evaluation: the abstract nature of the maps may hinder
the interpretation of their contents (especially for the casual
user) because it may not be immediately clear what the map
displays.
We think the additional structuring provided by the qualitative maps may allow for a means to improve both the
understanding of the problem to be solved, as well as the
contents of the bibliometric map, since it allows the user to
explicate the cognitive structures. And if we then interactively try to create a correspondence between the elements
in this structure and the bibliometric one, then the so-called
‘cognitive load’ on the user reduces since he or she would

Previous efforts

We are, of course, not the first to combine different types
of maps. Recent examples include the work presented in
[4] in which semantic structures and co-citation patterns are
combined into one map; and in [7] where actors and phrases
from both papers and patents are displayed in the same map.
But both of these examples blend different features of quantitative maps into a single map, whereas we want to introduce qualitative aspects in our mapping application as an
additional visualization tool.

3.2

Qualitative structure creation

There are a lot of tools able to create qualitative structures, like CmapTools (cmap.ihmc.us) or Conzilla (www.
conzilla.org/index.html). We do not favour any particular tool, since we want to concentrate on the combination of these type of structures with the bibliometric maps.
Additionally, in the current implementation we do not take
into account the structuring created by these tools: we are
merely interested in the terms associated with the selected
nodes in the structuring tool. So, the current implementation uses its own version of a qualitative structuring tool,
with rather limited capabilities.

3.3

Correspondence creation

Central in our design and in this paper stands the interactive creation of a correspondence between the qualitatively
and quantitatively created elements. We do this by expanding terms found in the qualitative map, so we quietly assume
that nodes in both maps have terms (words or phrases) associated with them. In this section we explain, after a short
introduction, how we envision this expansion, using a simple example to structure our arguments.
3.3.1

Term expansion

The use of a textual basis for the description of a knowledge
domain brings about flexibility, comprehensibility and, in
our case, a way of combining the two maps. However,
it also immediately brings up the well-known vocabulary
problem [5]: the richness and variance of natural language
makes it improbable that different subjects would describe,

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 1: A screenshot of the bibliometric mapping-application. It shows a map of ‘Nanotechnology’ and the distribution of impact of the actor ‘Leiden University’.

for instance, a group of related scientific papers using the
same terms.
Nevertheless, recent studies (see for instance [11]) reason that labels and concepts usually show a significant
degree of correlation and hence do possess some generic
value. We take these results to give additional legitimacy
to the (interactive) query-expansion used in information
retrieval to improve the retrieval rate (see [6], [16]) and
adopted here to create paths between nodes in the different
maps.
3.3.2

Expansion example

To illustrate the correspondence creation, we give an (admittedly simple) example. Assume we have a qualitative
structure explaining the field of ‘Nanotechnology’. In this
structure we have two related terms: nanoparticle and biosensor. Both words appear (as NP) in papers of this field
used in the evaluative study we already mentioned above,
as illustrated in Table 1. But they are not part of the definition of any cluster. Hence, they have to be expanded.
An easy way of expanding a term is to look up (in the
database used by the mapping application) the papers containing the term (NP) and then look for NPs in these papers
that do appear in the cluster definitions. The result of this
expansion is shown Table 2: the 10 most frequent expansion
terms of are listed together with the clusters they appear in.
The names of the clusters are given in Table 3. These names
may give additional clues to what the papers in a cluster are

NP

nanoparticle
biosensor

nt
567
1265

Table 1: Number of papers nt in the field of ‘Nanotechnology’ for two terms.

about, which may help to interpret the expansion.
From the table we can infer that nanoparticle is a rather
general term, with its extensions scattered all over the map.
But biosensor is a much more specific term, with its extensions limited to only 2 clusters. This should tell a user that
the latter expansion is nicely localized to a specific place
on the bibliometric map, whereas the first one is not and
probably needs further refinement.
3.3.3

Visualization of the expansion and manipulation

The expansion example above is a forest of two expansion
trees: both trees have depth 1 and breadth 10. But in general, the expansion strategy may expand specific terms further and extend the expansion trees to further depths.
At every level, the expansion can be quantified. For example, we can show the number of papers selected in a
path, both relative to the total number of papers of the root
term and the total number of papers in the selected clusters. These numbers may be shown on the edges of the tree,
and visualized using, for instance, colourings in the nodes.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Expansion

Cluster

n

1
1
5
5
5
9
17
18
18
20

13
12
14
60
14
12
12
48
22
25

1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

56
85
36
26
122
117
53
29
35
37

nanoparticle

metal nanoparticles
silver nanoparticles
aqueous solution
particle size
size distribution
thin film
atomic force microscopy
transmission electron microscopy
x-ray diffraction
room temperature
biosensor

electrode surface
amperometric biosensor
glucose biosensor
electrochemical biosensor
glucose oxidase
hydrogen peroxide
horseradish peroxidase
glassy carbon electrode
modified electrode
surface plasmon resonance

Table 2: Expansions of nanoparticle and biosensor into
terms used to built the clusters in the second column,
and the number of papers n associated with this expansion.

Cluster
1
2
5
9
11
17
18
20

Name
electronic structure
nanomolar concentration
particle size
thin film
electrical property
atomic force microscopy
transmission electron microscopy
room temperature

n
19762
9562
9262
5330
11703
11505
19340
5993

Table 3: Names of the clusters referred to in Table 2 with
number of papers n.

Colourings will also be used to visualize the distribution of
the expansion over the clusters. In essence, these quantifications amount to different forms of the classic precision
and recall statistics.
These data will allow the user to guide the expansion
and help decide where to cut off or deepen the expansion.
In the expansion example, the nanoparticle expansions were
scattered all over the bibliometric map. So this expansion
should probably be limited to subset of its children. We
will allow for two modes of limiting a expansion: the user
may ‘disable’ a node, at the same time disabling the children of the node; the user may ‘collapse’ a node, implicitly
disabling its children, but not the collapsed node.

3.4

The use of the combination of maps

We already mentioned that we consider the basic usage
of the combination of quantitative and qualitative maps as
some kind of a ‘remote control’: if we assume the user
has created a correspondence between (nodes in the) two
maps, then selecting a node on a qualitative map selects one
or more nodes on the quantitative one. The user can then
use the bibliometric mapping application as usual, i.e. just
like the user would have selected the nodes without the use
of the qualitative map (see [2] for more on this ‘usage as
usual’).
A more advanced usage lets the user select multiple
nodes in the qualitative map in order to compare the results
at instance. To visualize this, we could for each node and
combination of nodes from the qualitative map display a
new instance of the decorated bibliometric map. But this
will not be practical for more than, say, four selected nodes
since that would already require 15 different instances of
the same map. Alternatively, the decorations may be put in
a matrix-like structure like the crossmaps of [10]. A disadvantage of this alternative would be that the user is confronted with a third visualization structure, what only adds
to the cognitive load on the user.
Also, a correspondence created between nodes is rarely
perfect: not all papers in a cluster are selected in a correspondence. This information should preferably be incorporated into the results created by the combination of maps
as well. But how to do this is still a challenge. We could
let the size of the different bibliometric maps reflect this,
but this would impede the readability of the maps. Alternatively we could accompany the weight of a correspondence
with a colour frame around the bibliometric maps. Experimentation with these alternatives is a major task in the development process.
Finally, we should note that a user evaluation study will
be performed which will compare the current practice of the
use of the mapping application in an evaluative bibliometric
study, with that of the use of the mapping application con-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

taining the qualitative structuring and correspondence creation parts.

4

Concluding remarks

Combining qualitative maps with quantitative bibliometric maps is potentially a fruitful approach to attack some of
the inherent complexities of using a map for analysis purposes. Through the qualitative map, which is a more direct expression of the user’s perspective on the problem, the
bibliometric map and its data can be explored. And since
a qualitative map is a personal or localized expression, it
could speed up the interpretation and aid the use of the bibliometric data.
Also, allowing the user to interact and experiment with
the expansion of terms may invite the user to (re-)think
about the qualitative structure created, adding to the understanding and formulation of the problem for which the
qualitative map was an expression.
Next, we think that the qualitative maps may eventually
be made to express more complex science-policy related
problems, which can then be tackled successfully by using
bibliometric evaluation through the combination with a bibliometric map.
There are still a number of challenges left unaddressed.
Foremost, we haven’t addressed the use of (labeled) relations between nodes in a qualitative map. We’re still not
certain on how to incorporate these relations in our expansion framework, so we do not allow them in this first design.
Nevertheless, we are confident the current work will already contribute to the improved usage of our bibliometric
maps.

Acknowledgments
The work being described in this paper is carried out in
the context of the EC-funded research project called Monitoring Environment and Health R&D in Relation to SocioEconomic Problems: a New Approach to Impact Assessment (contract number QLK4-CT-2002-30244). The results
from this project are published on www.cwts.nl/qlk4.
This project is specifically targeted at combining qualitative
and quantitative maps of science. We would like to thank
all the participants in this project for the fruitful discussions
which help shape our ideas.

References

[2] R. Buter and E. Noyons. Improving the functionality of interactive science maps. Scientometrics, 51:55–68, 2001.
[3] M. Callon, J. Law, and A. Rip. Mapping the Dynamics of
Science and Technology, Sociology of Science in the real
world. The Macmillan Press Ltd., London, 1986. ISBN
0-333-37223-9.
[4] C. Chen. visualising semantic spaces and autor co-citation
networks in digital libraries. Information Processing and
Management, 35:401–420, 1999.
[5] G. Furnas, T. Landauer, L. Gomez, and T. Dumais. the vocabulary problem in human-system communication. CACM,
30(11):964–971, 1987.
[6] D. Harman. Towards interactive query expansion. In Proceedings of the 11th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 321–331. ACM Press, 1988.
[7] E. Hassan. Simultaneous mapping of interactions between
scientific and technological knowlege bases: The case of
space communications. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 54(5):462–468, 2003.
[8] S. Henninger and N. Belkin. Interface issues and interaction
strategies for information retrieval systems. In Conference
companion on Human factors in computing systems, pages
401–402. ACM Press, 1995.
[9] A. Huff, editor. Mapping Strategic Thought. John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, 1990.
[10] S. Mirris and G. Yen.
Crossmaps:
Visualization of overlapping relationsships in collections of journal papers.
PNAS Early Edition,
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0307604100, 2004.
[11] G. Newby. Cognitive space and information space. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 52(12):1026–1048, 2001.
[12] E. Noyons. Bibliometric Mapping as a Science Policy and
Research Management Tool. PhD thesis, CWTS, Universiteit Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands, 1999.
[13] E. Noyons, H. Moed, and M. Luwel. Combining mapping
and citation analysis for evaluative bibliometric purposes.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
50(2):115–132, 1999.
[14] A. v. Raan, M. Visser, T. v. Leeuwen, and E. v. Wijk. Bibliometric analysis of psychotherapy research: performance assessment and position in the journal landscape. Psychotherapy Research, 13(4):511–528, 2003.
[15] V. Srinivas and B. Shekar. applications of uncertainty-based
mental models in organizationals learning: a case study in
the indian automobile industry. Accounting, Management
and Information Technologies, 7(2):87–112, 1997.
[16] J. Xu and W. Croft. Improving the effectiveness of information retrieval with local context analysis. ACM Transactions
on Information Systems, 18(1):79–112, 2000.
[17] M. Young. Cognitive mapping meets semantic networks.
Journal of Conflict Research, 40(3):395–414, 1996.

[1] P. Anick and S. Tipirneni. The paraphrase search assistant:
Terminological feedback for iterative information seeking.
In Proceedings of the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 153–159. ACM Press, 1999.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

