Visualising Information: Evidence Analysis for
Computer-Generated Animation (CGA)
Ms N Hussin, Dr D Schofield and Dr M Tarek Shalaby
The University of Nottingham
For example, if information is entered into the
computer regarding the measurements and other
necessary data relevant to a truck, the computer can
process it through a designated program to accurately "recreate" how the truck must have skidded down a highway
and crashed according to a scientific analysis of the input
data variables [2].
Computer simulations can be used in a manner
similar to traditional demonstrative evidence. As graphics
provide simplified explanations of technical matters, so
do simulations. An expert in collision reconstruction
recreates a collision by taking the basic numbers such as
the weight of the vehicles, the length of skid marks, the
dimensions of the roadway, its coefficient of friction,
crush data, etc. (See Figure 1). Using generally accepted
mathematical formulae, the expert computes speeds and
reconstructs the events.

Abstract
This paper discusses the use of Computer-Generated
Animation (CGA) in a court of law. CGA is a way of
visualising evidence or information for a particular case.
In this paper, the case involves a fatal road collision. The
concepts and methods under consideration described in
this paper deal with the reliability and accuracy of CGA
dependent upon the forensic evidence. The paper has five
sections. The first explains the nature of animation and
the distinction between animation and forensic animation.
The second describes the general context of evidence,
from a legal aspect. The third section analyses the
correlation between evidence and knowledge, based on
the theory of knowledge. The fourth section elucidates the
reliability and accuracy of CGA based on the evidence
that has been used to create the animation. The final
section concludes the analysis by discussing whether a
certain CGA is reliable and accurate enough to
demonstrate an expert’s opinion in a court of law.
Keywords:
Visualisation,
Computer-Generated
Animation, Forensic animation, Knowledge, Evidence.

1. Nature of Animation
Visualisation is a process to make source data visual
or visible. CGA is one of the methods that can be used to
visualise data, information or mass evidence of an event.
Reconstruction can be described as animation in the
technical sense — images generated by a computer that
when run together produce the illusion of motion — but
where the source of the input data is different and more
involved. Animation is created by scientific data being
entered into a computer and processed by a computer
program. Thus, a reconstruction is derived from a series
of images rendered on a computer (like an animation), but
they accurately depict upon data collected and are,
usually, agreed upon by legal counsel beforehand [1].

Figure 1: Still from a CGA showing the skid mark on the
road

The power of animation lies in its ability to
accurately demonstrate an expert’s opinion while
generating no new data. Generally, the courts have treated
CGA illustratively, much like a traditional diagram or
chart. The animation transforms an expert’s testimony
into an exhibit that the average person can really see,
comprehend, and remember [3].
In this paper, a case study on road traffic collision
will be used as an example. This fatal collision involves
a motorbike and a motorcar. An investigation on the road

1
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

or computed manually. The computer generates
information for each of the vehicles.
For an animation depicting a fatal road collision, the
animation calculations are usually based on a series of a
small time increment of between 0.1 of a second and 1.0
second. A calculation is performed at each time interval
to allow the animator to accurately position a vehicle at
that particular moment in time. The time interval is
selected based on the animator’s experience and the
importance of the particular interval in questions (See
Figure 3).
For example, as the bike approaches the start of the
skid, the animator has very little data and must assume a
constant velocity hence s/he may use an interval of 1.0
second (See Figure 4). However when the bike begins to
skid s/he has more accurate calculation data and the often
happens so quickly, s/he may use and interval of 0.1 of a
second.

traffic collision begins with data collection; accuracy is
crucial as this data serves as the foundation for the
evidence.
At a collision scene traditionally an
investigator would take field measurements, do a rough
field sketch, take a set of photos and then draft up plans
of the collision scene. With any number of CAD
(Computer Aided Design) programs on the market,
accurate professional quality diagrams can be produced
very rapidly.
Analysis of the collision may determine who or what
was a proximate cause in the collision, exactly what
occurred in the collision sequence and who had the best
opportunity or last clear chance to avoid the collision. In
the case of multiple impacts, the expert may be able to
determine the impact sequence, timing, actions and
dynamics, as well as the damage and personal injury for
each sequence or action.

1.1.
The Distinction between Animation and
Forensic Animation ?
What turns an animation into a forensic animation is
the "process". The process depends on accuracy. For
example, all objects must obey the laws of physics and
conform to a set of facts that are determined by a
reconstructionist or forensic expert. The forensic process
for collision reconstruction, for example, starts with the
collision investigation. This includes all police reports,
witness statements, photographs, vehicle inspections,
experimental data, and medical reports if necessary. It is
this information which forms the basis on which a
collision reconstructionist will recreate the accident.
From this data an event chronology is created that fits
all the existing facts. The forensic expert will calculate the
placement of vehicles before, during, and after a collision.
Following this process, the expert calculates data
representing the movement of all the objects in the final
animation (See Figure 2).

Figure 3. Still from a CGA demonstrating the point
where the motorbike had skidded

Figure 4. Still from CGA showing the templates where
the motorbike had traveled before the collision

In summary this forensic process is as follows for
road collisions:
x See all vehicles involved in a collision, assess
their physical condition, and measure impact
damage and location.
x Perform a site survey and complete measurement
of the scene (See Figure 5).

Figure 2. Still from a CGA demonstrating the point where the
car is making the turning

This data may be entered into a computer running a
motor vehicle accident/collision reconstruction program

2
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

x

x
x
x
x

View photographs, if available taken at the
collision scene and analyse physical evidence if
it is still available.
Prepare police reports and witness statements.
Review all other data available.
Transform all data into a logical and accurate
scenario.
Furnish data to the animator.

3. Knowledge
Knowledge in this instance refers to the components
in the legal evidence. An item of evidence may consist of
numbers, words or facts pertaining to a particular case
under investigation. The essential of knowledge begins
with data. Data are numbers, characters, images, or other
methods of recording, in a form, which can be assessed by
a human, or (specifically) input into a computer, stored
and processed there, or transmitted on some digital
channel. Computers nearly always represent data in
binary. Data on its own has no meaning, only when
interpreted by some kind of data processing system does
it take on meaning and become information.
Information is a collection of facts or data. Finally,
knowledge is the combination of a state or fact of
knowing, understanding gained through experience or
study.
The use of evidence as material in the reconstruction
of past events makes a number of important philosophical
(specifically epistemology) assumptions. Epistemology
involves the study of theories of knowledge or ways of
knowing, particularly in the context of the limits or
validity of the various ways of knowing.
In discussing knowledge as a theory, the first
philosopher to define knowledge was Plato, who stated
that for one to say that one knows something: (1) It must
be true; (2) One must actually believe it, and (3) there
must be sufficient evidence for it (it must be justified).
The word justified actually links this definition with
what has been stated by Achinstein as substantial.
In this instance, the animators had taken the
information from and ordinance survey plan in Figure 5
and collision report in Figure 6.

Figure 5. An example of survey plan on the collision scene

2. Evidence
It is essential to note that visualising in this instance
refers to the legal evidence. The evidence is perceived as
information for the animator to animate the collision.
Evidence from the legal point of view refers to, every
type of proof legally presented at trial (allowed by the
judge) which is intended to convince the judge and/or jury
of alleged facts material to the case. It can include oral
testimony of witnesses, including experts on technical
matters, documents, public records, objects, photographs
and depositions (testimony under oath taken before trial).
It also includes so-called "circumstantial evidence" which
is intended to create belief by showing surrounding
circumstances that logically lead to a conclusion of fact.
Charts, maps and models that are used to demonstrate or
explain matters are not evidence on their own, but
testimony based upon such items and marks on such
material may be evidence. Evidence must survive
objections of opposing attorneys that it is irrelevant,
immaterial or violates rules against "hearsay" (statements
by a party not in court), and/or other technicalities [4].
For a conclusion to be acceptable as true, there must be
evidence to support it [5].
Achinstein defines evidence as follows: evidence E is
potential evidence on hypothesis H if and only if (1) E is
true; (2) E does not make H necessary; (3) the probability
of H on E is substantial; and (4) the probability of an
explanatory connection between H and E is substantial.
[6].
This definition correlates with the fundamentals in
knowledge in the next section.

Figure 6. An example of collision report prepared by the
collision investigator.

3
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

3.1. Theory of Knowledge

On the third element (C), the fact that the investigator
had visited the scene and collected the evidence
(information), endorses the information as correct i.e. the
real evidence. Real evidence refers to original evidence
such as gun, knife, shoe, etc. It also covers demonstrative
evidence such as maps, diagrams, chart, videotapes, etc.
[10]. If the animator had used the collision report as an
item of evidence to animate the collision, the animation in
this instance is more likely to be reliable and accurate.

The theory of knowledge covers a wide range of
knowledge elements. In this discussion the explanation
consists of two parts [7]:
x The types of knowledge.
x The conditions for knowledge.
These two elements have vital characteristics in
evaluating a particular item of evidence. The following
sub-sections elucidate these characteristics based on the
case of road collision.

3.1.2. The Conditions for Knowledge

3.1.1. The Types of Knowledge

This paper attempt to identify a set of necessary and
sufficient conditions for evidence falling under the
category concerned.
Here ‘S’ and 'p' are variables. 'S’ represents any
individual that can know information (e.g. a collision
investigator), and 'p' represents any information that can
be known (e.g. mathematical calculations).
The account of the information sense of knowing
yields three natural conditions:
x Information that p be correct.
The first condition is that the information that p
be true. In this analysis, p refers to the
mathematical calculation undertaken within the
collision investigation report. Expert witness
may testify to their own findings or to the
scientific or other principles relevant to the case
as well as drawing inferences from such
findings. The collision investigator S knows
the information p. S applies p to his report.
Therefore, the collision investigation report is a
piece of reliable and accurate evidence that can
be used to animate the collision. This would
evidentially reflects the expert testimony (i.e.
collision investigator).
x
S accepts the information that p.
To recognise information as correct is to have an
attitude toward it. The knower S endorses the
information in the sense that S stands behind it or
endorses it as being correct. Another way to
describe the endorsement is to say that S thinks
that p is correct or true information. This may be
seen in the United Kingdom case of R v Oakley
(1979) 70 Cr App R 7 [11] where a police
officer with qualifications and training in
collision investigation was allowed to give
evidence, on a charge of causing death by
dangerous driving, as to how the crash had
occurred.
In this analysis, the collision
investigator
endorses
the
mathematical
calculation in the sense that s/he demonstrates
the mathematical calculation stages by stages

There are several ways in which items of knowledge
can be described. Each of these ways there might
correspond a theory of that kind of knowledge. Three
types of knowledge proposed are [8]:x Competence. (A) An example of competence is
when an individual displays competence, the
interpretation is, that he or she knows how.
x Acquaintance. (B) An example of acquaintance is
when an individual may be said to know that with
which he or she is acquainted. To say that one
knows something, in this sense, is to say that they
have had some experience with what they know.
x Recognition of information as being correct. (C)
– this is knowledge in the (correct) "information"
sense. To know is to recognise correct information
as being correct.
Having said earlier that the collision report (E) is
knowledge (K), the collision report shall then be analysed
against the clarification tasks (A, B, C).
It is also essential to note that in analysing particular
evidence, not all types of knowledge i.e. A, B, and C will
be seen in that evidence.
Taking for example, the collision report analysed
against the competence, acquaintance, and recognition of
information as being correct. The collision report can be
seen as competent (A) on the basis that the person
preparing it is an expert in collision investigation (he
knows how). Secondly, the collision report can be seen
as acquainted (B) with the collision investigator on the
basis that the collision investigator will have had some
experience in investigating road collision similar to the
current investigation. The case of [9] National Justice
Compania Naviera v Prudential Assurance [1993] 2
Lloyd’s Rep 68, added that a well as giving independent
and unbiased evidence, an expert should tell the court if
s/he did not have experience of a certain area being
questioned on, or that s/he had insufficient information on
which to base a properly researched conclusion.

4
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

x

leading to the findings in the report. Therefore,
the application of the mathematical calculation
on the collision investigation report is a piece of
reliable and accurate information that has been
used to animate the collision. This would
evidentially reflects the expert testimony (i.e.
collision investigator).
Acceptance of the information that p be
justified.
Justification lies between reasonableness and
complete certainty. What lies between
reasonableness and complete certainty depends
on the result of the collision investigation report.
The result of the collision investigation is the
conclusion drawn from a series of mathematical
formulae, in this instance refers to the speed of a
vehicle. This conclusion is a type of information
that is not common to the average man and
which is possessed by the expert by reason of
his/her special study or experience. The expert
testimony is about the interpretation of those
results. Hence, the interpretation validates the
whole process of finding the speed of the
vehicle.

5. Conclusion
CGA may be used as one of the methods to visualise
information or facts from a particular case under
investigation. The analysis of the types of knowledge
distinguishes the type of information itself when looking
at particular evidence. The conditions for knowledge can
be used to make a specific analysis to determine the truth,
acceptance and justification values inherent within the
evidence. The authors believe that the correlation
between evidence and knowledge described is a sound
method for investigating as to whether the animation
reflects reliable and accurate information from the
evidence used.
CGA’s are often necessary to explain the
complexities of a case so that the jury can understand the
factual issues involved before they attempt the more
difficult task of determining how to resolve the
challenging factual disputes.
It may be hard to prove for sure if the CGA of the
event accurately represents the expert’s testimony.
However, to some extent, the elements that have been
discussed in the previous analysis, could be a useful guide
to measure the reliability and accuracy of the CGA. The
first three elements can be used to analyse the type of
knowledge in the evidence. On the other, the second set
of the elements can be used to analyse as to whether or
not the evidence meets any of the conditions.
Finally, the decision should then be left to the jury to
determine just how reliable and therefore how accurate
and credible the CGA is.

4. Reliability and Accuracy
The reliability of the animation as evidence still
depends ultimately on the expert testimony and
credibility. The witness can be fully cross-examined
regarding the animation, which, again, is simply the
graphic depiction of the witness’ testimony.
During the production process, steps must be taken to
ensure accuracy and reliability. The animator and expert
witness who assisted in directing the animation must be
ready to testify
x that the underlying data are accurate,
x that the process by which the data were fed into
the computer provides reasonable assurance that
error was avoided, and
x that those tests were used to maintain the
accuracy and reliability of the hardware and
software employed [12].
In summary, the animation depends on the reliability
and accuracy of the original source data, including all
formulas, calculations, and assumptions used in defining
and analysing the data. The reliability and accuracy also
extend to the source data entered into the computer and
capability of the computer hardware and software. In this
paper, it has been shown that the data and information of
the case are crucial. Evidence (knowledge) is used in a
legal investigation to prove the facts or points in question.

6. References

5
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

1

See State v. Clark, 655 N.E.2d 795, 813 (Ohio Ct. App.
1995).

2

Fred Galves.
Where the Not-So-Wild Things Are:
Computers in the Courtroom, the Federal Rules of
Evidence, and the Need for Institutional Reform and More
Judicial Acceptance. Harvard Journal of Law &
Technology
http://12.2.169.205/galves_article/HTML/article.html (Last
accessed: 04/05/2004)

3

See Imagewerks Animation homepage.
http://www.imagewerks.com/html/imagewerks__animation_informa.html (Last accessed: 04/05/2004)

4

Real Life Dictionary of the Law. Gerald and Kathleen Hill.
General Publishing Group. http://dictionary.law.com (Last
accessed: 04/05/2004)

5

Richard F. Taflinger. What is Evidence ? from Richard F.
Taflinger.
http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~taflinge/evidence.html
(Last
accessed: 04/05/2004)

6

P. Achinstein, The Nature of Explanation (1983) in Murphy
on Evidence. Peter Murphy. Oxford Press. 8th Edition.
ISBN 0-19-926303-5. p.2.

7

Lecture Notes, UC Davis Philosophy 102. http://wwwphilosophy.ucdavis.edu/phi102/lecmenu.htm (Last
accessed: 04/05/2004)

8

Keith Lehrer (Ph.D., Brown), Regents Professor of
Philosophy, concentrates on epistemology, free will, and
rational consensus. http://infocenter.ccit.arizona.edu/~phil/faculty/klehrer.htm (Last
accessed: 04/05/2004)

9

The Incorporated Council of Law Reporting for England
and Wales. http://www.lawreports.co.uk/civoct0.1.htm
(Last accessed: 04/05/2004)

10

Forensic Medicine for Medical Student. http://www.
forensicmed.co.uk/opinion_evidence.htm (Last accessed:
04/05/2004)

11

The Bar Vocational Couse. Faculty of Law, Bristol
Institute of Legal Practice. http://www.studylaw.co.uk/bvc/
evidence/OPINION.htm (Last accessed: 04/05/2004)

12

Robert Simmons & J. Daniel Lounsbery, Admissibility of
Computer-Animated Reenactments in Federal Courts
(Demonstrative Evidence), v30 Trial, Sept. 1994, p78(4).
http://www.halcyon.com/asllc/cle_ani4.html
(Last accessed: 04/05/2004)

6
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

