An Extended Platter Metaphor for Effective Reconfigurable Network
Visualization
Edwin H. Blake
Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, 7701, South Africa
<edwin@cs.uct.ac.za>
Abstract
We adapt the Flodar [6] metaphor to visualize
dynamic networks and present experimental results on
the effectiveness of this approach. Dynamic reconfiguration of networks enable rapid optimization of performance of a network, however, it poses several
management difficulties when user intervention is
required to resolve complex routing problems.
Our metaphor scales well for networks of varying
size, addresses the cluttering problem seen in past
metaphors and maintains the overall network context
while providing additional support for navigation and
interaction. We apply the metaphor to three dynamic
reconfiguration management tasks and show how these
tasks are visually represented with our approach.
We conducted an experiment with network
administrators and researchers as subjects. A good
understanding of network conditions portrayed in the
metaphor was achieved within a short period.

changes to node layout, categories of network
information and scalability. Our metaphor does not
address spatial layout, since this is not relevant and
spatial metaphors suffer from clutter for large networks.
We are also not aiming to build a complete management
tool such as CyberNet [7] but choose to address certain
key issues with a single metaphor.
We represent information about ‘origin-destination’
pairs as the following properties change dynamically:
• Capacity distribution
• Capacity versus route length distribution
• Route distribution
The rest of this paper will focus on the visualization
metaphor and will not deal with the network properties
themselves but we review some concepts below.
Necessary Network Concepts: Communication
channels are no longer limited to a fixed data rate: an
application uses only the bandwidth required. Networks

1. Introduction
We use visualization to address management
problems in dynamic high-speed networks. Traditional
network management tools are largely designed to serve
static networks and emphasize packet flow and node
connectivity [1] [2] [3] . Because dynamic reconfiguretion is constantly changing the logical network routes, it
is difficult to understand the interactions between
changing traffic demands and the logical connections on
which they are carried [4] below[5] .
Our contribution includes a visualization metaphor to
aid understanding connectivity changes in dynamic networks. We want greater understanding of resource
management algorithms and their impact on networks.
We developed and tested our network metaphors on the
data generated by our dynamic network simulation; and
evaluated the effectiveness of our approach with a
questionnaire-based subjective experiment.
Our platter metaphor is an extension of the original
metaphor used in the Flodar application [6] to include

Figure 1. Origin-Destination (OD) Pair (1-5) with
Path (1-2-3-4-5): Physical links (with capacities) are
solid lines; virtual (OD) pairs are dashed lines; circles
represent nodes. This route belongs to an OD (1-5) and
has a unique identifier with a path and capacity unit in
our application.

cater for various traffic services and can guarantee a
Quality of Service (QoS) for individual traffic services.
Underlying a network are virtual path connections
(VPCs) which form logical direct end-to-end
connections between all origin-destination (OD) pairs
(Figure 1). These end-to-end connections create fully
meshed logical networks or virtual path connection
networks (VPCNs) upon sparse physical networks [8] .
It is possible to adjust the routes and bandwidth of

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

VPCs dynamically in near real time in order to maintain
an optimally designed VPCN. Network resource
management adjusts the logical link capacities to size
the virtual path optimally whenever conditions demand.

2. The Platter Metaphors
The metaphor chosen had to fulfill the following
requirements:
• High Frequency and High Volume Dynamic

Figure 2. The Platter Metaphor from the Top: each
pillar represents a route with capacity. Routes of
the same OD pairs align to form a spoke from the
centre to the edge. The capacity of each route is
indicated by its proximity to the centre.
Reconfiguration:
Reconfigured routes may undergo several transformations to maintain service levels: changes in
capacity, extermination or introduction of logical
routes. Routes and capacities are updated frequently
while origin-destination pairs are updated
infrequently.
• Scalability in Network Size.
Traditional 2D metaphors (e.g., network map) are
prone to exhibit display cluttering. 3D metaphors
may exhibit less cluttering but the problem of
occlusion is introduced.
• Interactive Updates:
Primitives should allow
navigation through the data.

fast

rendering

and

Our platter metaphor is an adaptation of the Flodar
[6] application which was developed for identifying
unresponsive network servers (Figure 2). We adapted
the platter metaphor to accommodate support for OD
pairs and routes and large scalable networks. We
primarily used concentric rings from the centre to
indicate capacity. The capacity at the edge of the platter
is zero for most management applications (or some

other minimum capacity); the capacity in the centre of
the platter can represent a user-defined maximum.
Routes are represented as a pillars (i.e.,
geometrically cylinders or cubes) on the platter while
their capacity is encoded by its closeness or proximity
to the platter centre (here the height of each pillar didn’t
encode network information). We took this decision
because the height of an individual pillar closer to the
edge of the platter could occlude pillars on the same
orthogonal line from the edge to the centre.
An OD pair is represented by the arrangement of
routes in a straight line projecting from the centre
towards the edge of the platter (Figure 2 and Figure 6.
Platter Metaphor and Information Window used in the
experiment.). The image formed by multiple OD pairs
resembles the arrangement of spokes in a wheel.
There are numerous advantages to this layout:
1. Clutter can be minimized by aggregating a number
of routes into a single cylinder.
2. Route information can be represented using the
height, radius and material properties of each
cylinder.
3. The symmetrical design allows user to spot
interesting trends and patterns at a quick glance.
4. Overall network context is maintained, allowing
users to investigate individual OD pairs without
losing other interesting network features.
Providing detailed information about individual
routes is supported by the platter metaphor. When a
user selects a route on the platter, information such as
the capacity, logical route length, virtual path and the
OD pair to which it belongs, is displayed. Initially, we
used the material properties of each route cylinder and
3D text labels to provide the accompanying
information. However, we discovered this had a
significant impact of the rendering performance of the
metaphor for large networks. Instead, we decided to
include an information window which would display
this information. This information window allows for
additional control tools to support the metaphor.
Since the objects used in the platter are simple threedimensional primitives, it scaled well for large network
with many routes. No additional rendering support like
level-of-detail and frustum culling was needed to
display network configurations of up to 15,000 routes.
The platter metaphor demonstrated less cluttering
and supported a full context view of the entire network.
This was particularly useful for identifying patterns
within the network.
Initial testing suggested that the platter metaphor was
suitable for our primary applications based on feedback
received from our dynamic network expert. We tested
the metaphor's effectiveness across three management
applications. These applications ranged from simple

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 3. Platter Metaphor: Capacity Distribution between two reconfigured networks. Left — well-distributed routes with
varying capacity. Right — a larger concentration of routes with low capacity. The former is more desirable.
network accounting on the number of routes to more
complex applications such as displaying the distribution
of capacity versus the route length in the network.

portion of capacity leaving less capacity for the rest of
the network. Through this view, administrators can
easily identify routes with excessive capacity.

3. Management Applications

3.2. Application 2: Capacity vs Route Length

We have now motivated the general approach of
using the platter metaphor. In the following sections we
present several specific management tasks that are
supported by the platter metaphor.

This application is similar to the capacity distribution
view with colour used to indicate route length. This
application is useful when evaluating the optimal route
configuration after a network has undergone
reconfiguration. Colour is used to indicate the number
of links (i.e., logical route length) of each route. We
used six colours to encode route lengths ranging from
one to ten or more links. For example, red was used to
indicate route lengths between one and three links while
green encoded lengths between four and six. As in our
previous application, the capacity of each route is
encoded by its proximity to the centre. OD pair
affiliation is still represented as a straight line from the
edge to the centre of the platter.
This layout enables an administrator to view the
entire network configuration and make informed
decisions about the distribution of capacity amongst
routes. From Figure 4 we observe that the majority of
low capacity routes (i.e., routes near the edge) are green
which implies a route length between four and six links.
Based on this view, an administrator can observe when
excessive capacity is assigned to long routes with a

3.1. Application 1: Capacity Distribution
Effective routing is the centre of all operations in
network management. The platter metaphor can provide
information about the capacity distribution of the VPCN
network as illustrated in Figure 3. The layout of route
cylinders in each OD pair are used to indicate capacity
trends in the network. This view enables administrators
to gauge the distribution of capacity in the network. The
layout of routes gives a concise indication that the
majority of routes have low capacity since most routes
lie near the edge of the platter. Colour was used to
indicate OD pair affiliation.
This view is useful when administrative intervention
is required to distribute capacity amongst routes.
Attention can easily be drawn to routes which are close
the centre of the platter. These routes consume a large

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 4. Platter Metaphor: Capacity and Logical Length Distribution. Proximity to the centre indicates the
capacity while its colour indicates the number of links (i.e., length) in each route: Length legend: Red— 1–3;
Green— 4–6; blue— 7–9. Administrators can determine whether the reconfiguration is assigning excessive
capacity to potentially unstable and long routes. Left is an overview and Right is a close-up view. The spiral
pattern indicates that route capacities are increasing as the routes approach the centre of the platter.
length of five or more links. By drawing their attention
using the platter, an administrator can minimize
susceptibility to connection failures by monitoring long
routes with high capacities.

multiple routes existed between each start and
destination nodes whereas configuration B uses
predetermined routes. Both configurations are almost
identical, which implies that both route strategies
generate the same optimal network.

3.3. Application 3: Route Distribution
This view represents the number of routes in each
OD pair. A good network configuration will result in a
small number of routes, whereas a poor design will
have a large number of routes in each OD pair. A small
number of routes will have a higher capacity per route
than a configuration with a large number of routes.
Figure 5 demonstrates the effectiveness of this view.
Both figures are based on a network model given the
same traffic load. They differ only with respect that
configuration A had its routes chosen randomly when

4. Testing the Effectiveness
Our metaphor was developed to aid in understanding
dynamic network information, in particular:
• support for reconfigurable networks
• accommodation of abstract network data
• ability to handle large and sparse networks
In support of our metaphor design objectives, we
need to determine the usefulness and effectiveness of
this metaphor with respect to our application. To
evaluate the effectiveness of this metaphor, we analysed

Figure 5. Platter Metaphor: Route Distribution. The left (A) and right (B) images show two different
algorithms for route configuration. The difference between these networks is minimal and this indicates little
difference in number of routes in an OD pair for both configurations.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

researchers and administrators with experience or
knowledge in network management or administration.
There were 14 experimental subjects, 4 were
network administrators and the remainder were network
research students. They were given a short tutorial
explaining the concept of the metaphor and the network
properties it represents. Following this tutorial, these
subjects completed a network questionnaire designed to
test their knowledge of the platter metaphor and its
content. Questions were grouped into sections which
required specific network knowledge:
1. Physical appearance of the metaphor
2. Quantitative network route information
3. Detailed information on individual network routes
4. Problem solving using network information
contained in the metaphor
5. Administrative network decisions based on the
information provided by the metaphor
Each section contained 4 questions except for
Section 4 which had 3 questions.
The questions in Sections 1 and 2 were based on a
set of images. These images were generated by our
platter metaphor program. A subject was asked to
investigate and identify network routes portrayed in
each image. In response, the subject chose an
appropriate response from the multiple-choice list.
Sections 3, 4 and 5 are based on a computer program
using the platter metaphor. The subject will be asked to
extract information from the metaphor using the threedimensional navigation controls and an information
widget (Figure 6).
Section 5 was treated as a special section since it
required administrative knowledge to answer
successfully. Each question in this section is either
TRUE, FALSE or UNDECIDED.

4.1. Results
Figure 6. Platter Metaphor and Information Window
used in the experiment.
Top—platter metaphor: bands from outside to
inside represent an increase in capacity. Bottom —
window for details about the route and its capacity.
the metaphor to determine how well it conveys our
dynamic reconfiguration information. Two important
metrics were investigated:
1. Time taken to learn and interpret the metaphor,
2. Correct interpretation and understanding of current
network conditions.
We employed user testing to test and verify our
assertions about the effectiveness of the metaphor.
Users' responses to a questionnaire were recorded and
analysed to measure their understanding of the current
network configuration. The users were network

The mean score for all subjects was 80.08%.
Subjects scored 83.8% for Sections 1 to 4 with a mean
score of 66% for Section 5. Each section required
network skills of varying degrees. These included
simple accounting and quantification of network units
to more complex network management problems
including resolving abnormal network conditions.
We analysed the relationship between the Total
Score and Network Experience. We tested whether
experienced administrators have a higher total score
than administrators with less experience.
This correlation revealed an unexpected negative rcorrelation value of -0.66 (r = -0.66, t = -3.04, p =
0.0102). This is significant at a 95% confidence level.
This result suggests that more experienced network
subjects are less likely to have a higher total score. We

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

discussed this correlation attempting to clarify the cause
of this relationship in Section 4.2.
Timing results tested our hypothesis that the time
taken to learn the metaphor is small. The mean total
time for the experiment is 23.43 minutes. There was an
increasing mean time progressing through successive
sections. The mean total time is 23.43 minutes with a
minimum of 14 minutes and a maximum of 59 minutes.

4.2. Discussion
As noted above we were initially surprised at a
negative correlation between experience and score. We
re-examined the results and found an outlier. One
subject performed poorly in the questionnaire resulting
in a total score of 21.03%. This subject had 10 years
network experience. We removed this sample as an
outlier and recomputed the Total Score versus Network
Experience correlation. The new r-correlation value of
0.17 (r = 0.16; t = 0.52; p= 0.61) is insignificant at the
95% confidence interval.
We showed that less experienced administrators
perform equally well in this experiment. We compiled
an expected score range for suitably qualified network
administrators, who had experience in configuring and
administering such networks. From our questionnaire,
we extracted the mean times and mean scores for
sections requiring varying degrees of network
management skills.
It was evident that the scores achieved by all the
subjects for each section were within expected score
ranges. This supports our suggesting that this metaphor
aids the understanding of administrators and supports
their management capabilities. In all sections, the mean
time for each section scored by subjects is in our
expected range. It shows that most subjects grasped the
fundamentals of the experiment within 30 minutes.
The mean time to complete all networks tasks is
23.43 minutes. This is considered acceptable by today's
standards. It is not uncommon to have network tools
which require hours or days of training before subjects
have adequate grasp of its functionality.

5. Conclusions
Our main contribution lies in a metaphor design to
convey abstract network information in a concise and
understandable manner. Our platter metaphor has
overcome several drawbacks inherent in previous
visualizations while aiding the understanding of
complex dynamic changes in reconfigurable networks.
We ran user experiments with network administrators and researchers. The results confirm that our

metaphor is effective in conveying network information
and that this understanding is rapidly achieved.
The design of the platter enables efficient and easy
monitoring, requiring less time to identify abnormal
network conditions than interpreting textual log files
generated by a dynamic network. It aids administrators
particularly in understanding complex network
relationships and connectivity changes. The experiment
results also emphasized that the platter metaphor did not
require expert administrative knowledge or extensive
previous training in order to monitor our network
management application.

6. Acknowledgements
Thanks to my student Oliver Saal for developing the
system, Professor A.E. Krzesinski of the University of
Stellenbosch for the Network Simulation and
Reconfiguration Data. This work was supported by the
South African National Research Foundation, Telkom
and Siemens South Africa

7. References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

R.A. Becker, S.G. Eick, and A.R. Wilks. “Visualizing
Network Data.” IEEE Trans on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 1(1):16–28, March 1995
S.E. Lamm, D.A. Reed, and W.H. Scullin. “Real-time
geographic visualization of World Wide Web traffic.”
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 28(7–
11):1457–1468, 1996.
W.H. Scullin, T.T. Kwan, and D.A. Reed. “Real Time
Visualisation of World Wide Web Traffic”. In
Symposium on Visualizing Time-Varying Data,
Williamsburg, VA, September 18-19 1995.
E.E. Koutsofios, S.C. North, and D.A. Keim.
“Visualizing Large Telecommunication Data Sets”.
Computer Graphics & Applications, 19(3):16–19, 1999.
Robert F. Erbacher, "Visual Traffic Monitoring and
Evaluation," Proceedings of the Conference on Internet
Performance and Control of Network Systems II,
Denver, CO, August, 2001, pp. 153-160
E. Swing. Flodar: “Flow Visualisation of Network
Traffic”. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
18(5):6–8, September and October 1998
P.Abel, P.Gros, C.R.D.Santos, D.Loisel, andJ.-P.Paris.
Automatic construction of dynamic 3d metaphoric
worlds: An application to network management. In J. R.
Robert Erbacher, Philip Chen and C. Wittenbink,
editors, Visual Data Exploration and Analysis VII,
volume 3960, pages 312--323, Jan. 2000.
S. Berezner and A. Krzesinski. Call Admission and
Routing in ATM Networks based on Virtual Path
Separation. In 4th Int Conf on Broadband
Communications, Stuttgart Germany, April 1998

