Visualizing Interdisciplinary Citations to and from Information and Library
Science Publications
Rong Tang
School of Library and Information Science, Catholic University of America, USA
{tang@cua.edu}
Abstract
Empirical investigations of citations to and from 150
journal articles published in the field of Information and
Library Science (ILS) has enabled cross-mapping of the
interdisciplinary evolution of the field. The publications
were randomly drawn in six years between 1975 and
2000, with 25 articles each from the selected years.
ANOVA tests reveal that although raw counts of self- and
extradisciplinary- citations are not significantly different
by year, they are different depending on whether it is
from or to ILS. Nearly 30 disciplines hold mutual
citations with ILS, and Computer Science,
Communication, Management Science, Education, and
Psychology are among those highly impact disciplines.
Visualization further depicts the clustering of the citing
and cited disciplines. In general out-degree citations
contain richer set of nodes than those of in-degree, but
overall, the mapping of the interdisciplinary scope of the
ILS field provides convincing evidence for the
interdisiciplinary nature of Library and Information
Science.

ILS publications. The purpose is twofold: (1) to outline
the interdisciplinary breadth of both in-degree and outdegree citations of field, and (2) to highlight those key
fields that present great intellectual proximity with ILS
by holding mutual citation exchange with the field.
Citations to and references from 25 randomly selected
ILS articles, published in 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995
and 2000, were recorded. The diversity and change in
the number of cross-disciplinary in-degree and outdegree citations over four decades are impressive. Even
though the analysis based on the raw counts suggests that
those who cite ILS is significantly different from those to
whom ILS cites, there were 29 disciplines that cited as
well as were cited by the ILS articles.

2. Research questions
The study addresses the following questions:
1. What is the interdisciplinary breadth of
Information and Library Science (ILS) manifested
through citations to (in-degree) and reference from
(out-degree) 25 ILS journal publications each in
the six selected years?
2. Are there any statistically significant differences
between the raw citation counts among the years
selected?
3. Are there any statistically significant differences of
the raw citation counts between the directions of
citations?
4. How to effectively visualize or map the
interdisciplinary dimensions of the citations from
and to ILS publications?

1. Introduction
Early bibliometric analysis of scholarship structure
of Information and Library Science (ILS hereafter) has
concluded that ILS is a relatively insular field with
limited impact from or on other disciplines [1-3]. The
self-citation ratio of ILS publications has been found in
the high range of 74-80% [2-3], until Buttlar’s data
suggested a lowered rate of 50% [4]. Upon examining 61
ILS dissertations, Buttlar found Education and Computer
Science are highly cited disciplines by ILS doctorates.
The author thereby declares, “Library and information
science is definitely an interdisciplinary field and has
close relationships with the fields of education, computer
science, health/medicine, psychology, communications,
and business, among others.” [4, p241]
Motivated by the idea of gathering systematic
evidence for the developmental path of ILS knowledge
structure and performing statistical tests on ILS
interdisciplinary configurations, this study collected
integrated data of references from and citations to 150

3. Data collection, processing, and analysis
The study’s sample data include counts of citation to
and reference from publications in the subject category
of “Information Science & Library Science.” Science
Citation Index (dialog files 434 and 34), Social Science
Citation Index (dialog file 7), and Arts and Humanities
Citation Index (dialog file 439) were searched, with the
publications limited to journal articles (limitall/art) and
years of publications being 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990,

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

1995, and 2000. Duplicates were removed. For each
year, 25 publications were randomly selected and
reference lists, citation frequency and subject category
distribution of the cited and citing documents were
recorded. Overall, data are reference from and citations
to 150 ILS documents, 25 from each of the six years.
The data collection proceeded through two stages.
Stage 1 focused on in-degree citations. At that point, for
each publication, the total number of citations was noted,
as was the total number of self-citations and
extradisciplinary citations. If an article cites a publication
or is cited by a publication in the field of Information and
Library Science, it is noted as an “ILS_Self” item. For
extradisciplinary citations, the actual distribution of
subject categories was recorded. An extradisciplinary
citation is defined as a citation coming from a discipline
outside the discipline of the cited document. In this
study, any citation that is published in a journal that does
not belong to “Information Science & Library Science”
ISI subject category (SC) is considered to be an
extradisciplinary citation.
The exact searching sequence is as follows:
(1)
Searching ILS journal article publications.
For example, in searching unique citations to
1975 publications (py=1975), the commands
are:
b 434, 34, 7, 439; limitall/art
S sc=”information science & library science” and
py=1975
Rd

Commands “B”, “S”, and “RD” are dialog
search commands for “Begin,” “Select”, and
“Remove Duplicates.”
(2)
Capturing selected publications. Six sets of
25 random numbers were generated. Selected
publications were typed or displayed and basic
bibliographic information of each document
was captured through dialoglink “capture file”
option.
(3)
Searching citation information. With each
selected publication, citation information was
collected through searching the CR (Cited
Reference) field. For example, in searching
journal article citations to the article below:
TITLE: OPTIMIZATION OF LIBRARY EXPENDITURE
ON BIOCHEMICAL JOURNALS
AUTHOR(S): LINE MB
JOURNAL: JOURNAL OF DOCUMENTATION, 1975 ,
V31, N1, P36-37
LANGUAGE: ENGLISH DOCUMENT TYPE: ARTICLE

Following commands were issued:
B 434, 34, 7, 439; limitall/art
S cr=line mb, 1975, v31, ?

At the time of searching in-degree citations (November
2003), the system retrieved 27 citations, with 25 citing
documents from the ILS field itself, and 3 from others.
Extradisciplines
included
communication,
multidisciplinary sciences, and veterinary medicine. Note
that one citing document had two subject categories --

“communication” and “information science & library
science,” and thus the total of self-citation and
extradisciplinary citation exceeds 27. The data set
contained many cases for which the total citation count is
more than the simple addition of self-citation and
extradisciplinary citation because the fact that many
items belong to multiple subject categories. In cases
where there are subdisciplines of a general discipline,
only the top-level discipline name was recorded. For
example, the label “Computer Science” represents all
instances of “Computer Science, Theory & Methods,”
“Computer Science, Interdisciplinary Applications,”
“Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence,” among
others.
The second round of data collection involved looking
up the subject area of each item in the reference lists of
all 150 publications. Books and journal articles were
pursued separately. For references to journal articles,
search citation databases (file 7, 34, 434, 439) for the
journal’s subject category and record them. For
references to books, search LCMARC (file 426) to
record the descriptors and call number of the book items.
Special consideration was given to multiple cases: (1)
Foreign language items are recorded as “foreign
language,” (2) Newspapers and popular magazines not
indexed in dialog files are grouped under the “popular
culture” category, in the group of journals and listed as
extradisciplinary references; (3) There were items not
found in either book or journal databases; they were
recorded as “not found;” (4) There were also
unpublished theses, and they are recorded as “N/A;” and
(5) When there are multiple descriptors, use an LC call
number to determine the subject category class. For
example, the descriptor for the item -- Salton, G. (1989)
Automatic Text Processing – is “Text processing
(Computer science)” and the Call number is QA class.
The item was therefore grouped under computer science.
Another Salton book, Smart Retrieval Systems has the
descriptor as “SMART (Information retrieval system),”
the LC class is Z, and hence the item belongs to ILS_
Self.
Descriptive data analysis was performed in order to
report the contrast between extradisciplinary citation and
reference distributions. Correlation analysis of ILS and
various non-ILS disciplines is conducted. One-way
ANOVA was performed to test differences of crossdisciplinary citations by year and by direction. Finally,
social network analysis CYRAM NetMinerII was used to
visualize the interdisciplinary scope of ILS per year and
as a whole.

4. Results
The presentation of results will progress from reports
of descriptive data, to inferential statistical tests on the
significance of change in the years and citation
directions, then to social network-based graphical
charting of interdisciplinary configuration based on
merged citation data. Note that the data unit used in this
paper is raw counts, and further analysis based on binary

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

counting (measured at the item level) may reveal
different insights to the interdisciplinarity of the ILS
field.

4.1. Distribution of self and extradisciplinary
references and citations
Figure 1 displays the contrasts between self- and
extradisciplinary citations from and to the 25 ILS
publications in 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000.
It is clear that there is an upward trend for both citations
from and to ILS. However the dramatic turning point in
the number of citations from ILS publications is 2000,
while citations to ILS saw a small growth in citations
from the ILS field itself in 2000, yet the significant
increase of extradisciplinary in degree citations took
place in 1990.

580

334

336

272
240

162
37

99

16
45
1 975

10

42
1 980

84

89
14

46
19 85

33
1 990

Y ear

71
34
53
199 5

99
30

23
59

for extradisciplinary citations is only marginally
significant (F=4.934, df=1, p<0.01), the difference of self
citations by direction is highly significant (F=9.341,
df=1, p=0.05). Other disciplines that differ by in degree
and out degree citations are industry and labor study,
linguistics, history, and dictionary (i.e., language
resource). Disciplines whose numbers of citations differ
significantly by year include environmental science,
math, and urban studies.

4.3.
Chronological
mapping
of
interdisciplinary scope of ILS publications

the

The representation of the interdisciplinary citation
traffic within each year is actualized through NetMinerII,
a piece of software for social network analysis. Using the
software, all disciplines being cited as well as citing ILS,
are reflected through surrounding nodes linking to the
central node - ILS. The circle shape represents
disciplines that hold mutual citations with ILS. The
direction of citations is indicated by the arrow heads and
the frequency of citations is indicated next to the line.
Figures 2, 3, 4 are the citation mapping of 1975, 1980,
and 1985; Figures 5, 6, 7 are for 1990, 1995, 2000,
respectively. In all instances, it was attempted to keep the
location of a given discipline roughly consistent, with
social science disciplines in the upper left region, arts
and humanities in the lower left region. The lower right
region consists of business related sciences, as well as
some pure sciences such as Math. The upper right region
is for medical sciences, biology, engineering and
technology. For all six years, ILS Self, Computer
Science, Management, and Communication serve as the
polar disciplines for the four axes.

200 0

ILS _DIFF (citedby ILS)

ILS_D IF F (citing ILS )

ILS _SE LF (citedby ILS)

ILS_S ELF (citing ILS )

Figure 1 Self and Extradisciplinary Citations
There is a significant correlation between
extradisciplinary citations and self-citations (r=0.89,
p<0.01). Additionally, there are a total of nine disciplines
that hold significant correlations with the distribution of
self citation counts. Disciplines that hold significant
correlations at the 0.01 level include electronic electric
engineering, management, psychology, and social
science.
Computer
science,
communication,
telecommunications, history, and economics are
significantly correlated with ILS self-citations at the 0.05
level.

4.2. Differences in citation by year and direction
An ANOVA test on raw citation counts did not
result n a significant difference by year for both the
number of self-citations and number of extradisciplines.
However, the difference was significant when the
direction of citations was used as the independent
variable. Although the difference in citation directions

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 2 Cross Disciplinary Citations in 1975

Figure 3 Cross Disciplinary Citations in 1980
Figure 6 Cross Disciplinary Citations in 1995

Figure 4 Cross Disciplinary Citations in 1985

Figure 7 Cross Disciplinary Citations in 2000
The highest number of disciplines that hold mutual
citations to ILS occurs in 2000, where a total of 15 such
disciplines emerged. The second peak occurred in 1990,
when the number of disciplines that have mutual
citations with ILS had increased from 4 in 1975 and
1980 to 9 in 1985 to 11 in 1990. 1995 saw a decrease to
8 mutual citing disciplines. Interestingly, the visual
comparison of the location of these mutual disciplines
seem to suggest a move from social science in early
years, to arts and humanities in 1985, then to business in
1990, then to medical sciences in 1995. The year 2000
embraces all domains yet medical sciences, business and
other hard sciences appear to dominate.

4.4. Merged view of ILS interdisciplinary scope
Figure 5 Cross Disciplinary Citations in 1990
When combining data of all six years together, a
picture of the full range of ILS interdisciplinary citations

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

emerged. Out of 49 extradisciplines, there are a total of
29 extradisciplines that hold mutual citation exchange
with ILS. Tables 1 and 2 contain data on disciplines that
have an average of 3 years of in-degree and out-degree
citations with ILS. Computer Science is the only
extradiscipline that cited and was cited by ILS
publications every year. Other key influential disciplines
include
management,
education,
psychology,
communication, industry and labor studies, economics,
business, medical sciences, history, law, social science,
and math.
Table 1 Mutually Influential Disciplines to ILS
ILS
SELF

COMP
SCI

MAN
AGE

EDU

PSY
CH

COMM

toILS

6

6

4

4

4

5

fromILS

6

6

5

5

5

4

totalILS

12

12

9

9

9

9

Table 2 Mutually Influential Disciplines to ILS
LAB
OR

ECO
N

BUS

MED
SCI

HIST

LAW

SOC
SCI

MAT
H

toILS

2

2

3

2

2

2

2

2

fromILS

6

6

5

5

5

4

4

4

totalILS

8

8

8

7

7

6

6

6

Figure 8 includes all the disciplines that have any kind of
citation relation with ILS over the six years. Values
listed by the link line are the number of years when
citations occur and the circle shape represents disciplines
that have mutual citations with ILS. Since the four
regions in the chart roughly represent the domains of
science (upper right and part of lower right), business,
social science (upper left), and arts and humanities
(lower left), and since all four regions are heavily
occupied, we might be able to conclude that the
interdisciplinarity of ILS embodies all domains.
Disciplines that have mutual citation exchange with ILS
range from political science, literature, geography, to
nursing, telecommunications, material science, urban
studies, and environmental science. Among those
disciplines that have unidirectional exchange with ILS,
studies are woman studies, philosophy, anthropology,
museum, journalism, statistics, pharmacy, and
astronomy.

Figure 8 Merged View of ILS Interdisciplinary
Citations

4.4. Clustering structure of ILS interdisciplinary
citations
Using overall citation counts and separating the data
by the direction of the citation, NetMinerII enabled a
clustering of the interdisciplinary citations. Figure 9 is
the 3 dimensional graph of the clustering structure of indegree citations to ILS, whereas Figure 10 is the 2-d
counterpart.

Figure 9 3-D View of ILS In-degree Citation
Clustering

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

5. Discussion and Conclusion

Figure 10 2-D View of ILS In-degree Citation
Clustering
A total of 15 groups emerged. Group 7, for instance,
consists of geography, industry and labor studies,
psychology, chemistry, law, and engineering. ILS-self,
computer science, communication, education, math,
business, management, and urban study are all in a
cluster by themselves. The out-degree citation clustering
generated many more clusters, figure 11 shows the 3-d
clustering view of out-degree citations.
There are a total of 29 clusters for out-degree
citations. Here clusters that contain only one member are
ILS
self,
computer
science,
communication,
management, education, biology, electronic and electric
engineering, psychology, business, medical sciences,
science, engineering, and math, among others.

The study produced a rich set of results relevant to the
evolutionary mapping of the interdisciplinary breadth of
the ILS field. With about 50 extradisciplinary citations to
and from ILS publications sampled in six years from four
decades, the data evidently support the assertion that ILS
has reached its scholarship maturity and that it is a highly
interdisciplinary field which attracts learned interests
from a wide range of disciplines from the domain of
science, social science, and the humanities.
To address the first research question concerning
interdisciplinary breadth, it is clear that ILS has an
abundance of intellectual substances that are of interest
to many extradisciplines and that ILS also reaches out to
many other disciplines’ research work. The sample data
reveal that 29 disciplines hold mutual citation exchange
with ILS, and 20 disciplines have singular citation
connections with the field. The key mutually influencing
disciplines of ILS were identified as computer science,
management,
education,
psychology,
and
communication. Among them, computer science holds
undeniable intellectual affiliation with ILS. During each
of six years, computer science both cited and was cited
by ILS.
Statistically significant differences by year were
limited to citations of several extradisciplines. Stronger
differences were found between the direction of the
citations, meaning that the population which cites ILS
may be different from that which ILS cites. More
insightful results may be obtained by using other kinds of
counting methods, such as binary counting that treats
publication as the unit of analysis. Further research using
binary counts and other comprehensive measurements is
currently planned.
The visualization and mapping of ILS
interdisciplinary scope is realized through NetMinerII.
At this stage, the clustering is done based on raw
frequency count. Other ways of measuring
interdisciplinary citation exchange will be incorporated
and the visualization may provide better insight into the
scholarship structure and interdisciplinary connection of
the ILS field.

References

Figure 11 3-D View of ILS Out-degree Citation
Clustering

[1] J.K. Bracken, and J.M. Tucker, “Characteristics of the
Journal Literature of Bibliographic Instruction”, College
and Research Libraries, 50 (November 1989), pp. 665673.
[2] R.N. Broadus, “The Literature of the Social Sciences: A
Survey of Citation Studies”, International Social Science
Journal, 23 (1971), pp. 236-243.
[3] B.C. Peritz, “Citation Characteristics in Library Science:
Some Further Results from a Bibliometric Study”,
Library Research, 3 (1981), pp. 55-65.
[4] L. Buttlar, “Information Sources in Library and
Information Science Doctoral Research”, Library &
Information Science Research, 21(1999), pp. 227-245.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

