Digital-Primitive Art Research: Animation Permeates Centuries-old Rawhides
Professor LiQin Tan
Fine Arts Department, Rutgers University, NJ., USA
ltan@camden.rutgers.edu
Abstract
This paper provides a brief introduction and
an inspection of my “Digital-Primitive Art” series of
artwork and research in 2004.
The visual creations of “Digital-Primitive Art”
consist of 3D animation/modeling images that are
digitalized on centuries-old rawhides, parchments and
natural wood, as well as being projected onto both sides
of rawhides through video projectors. It offers new
dialogue among old and new technologies; early and
modern American spiritualities, ephemeral and timeless
art forms, and digital and primitive art significations.
Artistic
perception
and
technical
comprehension are twin brothers in the digital animation
family. They mutually accelerate the expansion of
computer animation. Maintaining equilibrium among
electronic and primitive spirituality, digital technology
and ethno-technology is a focus in this art exploration.
Keywords: Digital Art, 3D Animation, Primitive Art,

a critical framework for a new medium of artistic
expression. This medium would combine modern
technology with centuries-old approaches to spirituality.
1.2. Structural Components
The series of this artwork is divided into four
components. They are as follows: Digital Parchment
Prints, Digital Parchment Projections, Digital Wood
Prints, and Primitive Animation Devices. The first two
components have been completed and the others are still
under digital processing and creative construction.
Digital Parchment Prints
Unique 3D animation/modeling images are printed
on a rawhide surface with a digital inkjet printer, and the
rawhides are stretched by using aluminum clamps and
cotton strings. The strings are fastened to a naturally
textured cedar wood frame. Various parchment sizes and
irregular shapes can be clamped with flexible strings at
all angles. All frames are made with 4” x 4”cedar wood,
measuring 60” in width and 72” in height.

1. Introduction
1.1 Research Introduction
The conceptual, artistic and technical research
involved in visually creating what I term “digitalprimitive art” may be the first of such studies in its field.
It was a multifaceted and reciprocal process. It involved
making digital 3D images through primitive technology
and materials, and making primitive rawhide-art through
digital technology and methodology. My hope is that
“digital-primitive art” can transcend the traditional and
modern uses of art elements and can result in integrating
digital and primitive values into one manifestation.
These works will embody the expression of digital
animation and early American symbolism. Forms from
American spiritual imagery and earth astrology were
digitized onto the rawhides’ surface and present a new
digital art form through animation principles, digital
image perceptions, early American spirituality, and
primitive art implications.
Not only are there extensive questions to be
explored relating to the expressive possibilities within
the realm of digital-primitive art, one must also develop

Figure 1, Digital-Primitive King, 60” x 72”, 2004

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Distinctive 3D animation/modeling images are
printed on various natural wood surfaces with a digital
inkjet printer. The creation of 3d images is inspired by
natural wood shapes, primitive, folk, and contemporary
art. “Digital and Nature” are the main themes in this art
exploration.
Primitive Animation Devices
Contemporary Thaumatrope, Phenakistoscope and
Zoetrope have been created with wood, metal and glass.
These devices consist of digital 3d/2d image sequences,
using parchment and a wood screen. Audiences can
actively participate to create the animation through such
devices.

2. Background
“When we consider a new project, we really study it…not
just the surface idea, but everything about it.” -------Walt

Disney.

Figure 2, Digital-Primitive Queen, 60”x72”, 2004
Digital Parchment Projections
3D animation is simultaneously projected on both
sides of the parchments, which has a variety of animation
images, timing, composition, coloring, effects and
animation principles. Due to the semi-transparency and
rough texture surface of the parchments, the effects are
miraculous causing both sides to illuminate in motion.
This projection portrays an illusion that the animation is
permeating through the parchments. The audience may
admire the work from any angle. The size of a DigitalParchment-Projection is approximately 18ft x 5ft X 8ft,
including the distance between the projectors & the
rawhides.

Animation is a uniquely expressive art form: it
provides the creator with control over both the
appearance and the movement of characters and objects.
This gives the artist tremendous freedom, which, when
well used, can create works with remarkable impact.
Digital 3D animation has been burgeoning steadily over
the past decade, as seen in “Jurassic Park”, which
initialed digital technology with Dinosaur creation. “Toy
Story”, which was the first fully digitized animation
movie, captured global attention. 3D industries and
digital animation institutions have been springing up like
mushrooms, making it possible for good and bad
animation movies to have a chance to participate in the
current market. But, the voice of exploring digital 3D
animation as a pure art form is actually powerless and
ineffective.

Figure 3, Digital-Primitive Running
18’x 5’x 8’, 2004
Figure 4, Digital-Primitive Dancing
Digital Wood Prints

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

18’ x 5’ x 8’, 2004

Within the animation community, there is both
historical and aesthetic tension between 2d/3d animation
and fine art animation; animators, fine artists and
technicians have impractical expectations. Several
common animation matters such as Storyboard, Layout,
Character Design, and Timing are established by
animators, fine artists and educators. These matters are
important in digital 2D/3D animation. In terms of digital
3D animation being applied as a pure art form, there are
conflicts and disagreements among technique and art
orientated animators and fine artists. The former believes
that animation is the key to freedom for movies, films,
videos and commercial TV shows, and, that it will be
able to achieve everything with animation eventually
through advanced technology. The most fine art
animation produces simple movement. It lost the essence
of animation and appears immobilized and incapable in
terms of movie senses and elements. The latter considers
that technique cannot substitute human emotion and
artistic perception. Animation involves timing-based
images and is based on an exaggeration that applies the
artist’s own personality and visualization. It is a form of
freedom that connects culture, concepts, religions,
sexualities and society issues.

symbolized as “Digital <f, that is, (Finite) and
Primitive= f (Infinity)”--the title of my solo exhibition. I
would suggest that any modern technology be changed
or replaced, however, the primitive systems of
signification retain their impact. As the ideologies and
technologies of society change, today’s state-of-the-art
technology will be tomorrow’s primitive skills.
During this digital age, digital technologies,
telecommunications, and the digital arts are transforming
contemporary culture and daily life. We are living in
concrete and digital jungles and are trained to be
“technopagans.” The research project will emphasize
cultural analysis and criticism from a humanistic
perspective, and seek to foster new pathways to
innovation in digital culture across a wide spectrum of
conventional, cultural, natural, disciplinary, and
primitive practices. Keeping the equilibrium among
electronic spirituality and primitive spirituality, digital
technology and ethno-technology will be a focus of the
work.

According to those disputes, I simply divide them
into industrial animators and perceptual/conceptual
animators. In this contemporary world, realistic effects
have an impact on the soul of the current concepts and
technical nature in the field of animation. Each new
technical step in achieving 3D animation natural
impression will be supervised and energized by
industrial animators. I describe this phenomenon as the
“Pre-Picasso” period. Perceptual and conceptual works
have a dramatic potential to be recognized by the public
and artistic spectators in a new century. At this stage,
recognition for the balance between industrial animation
and perceptual animation is practically necessary.
Recently, most animation researchers are focusing
on the development of new technology, animation
movies, and the animation theory is mainly a comment
on industrial and commercial work. There are a few
serious issues that examine the process implications of
digital 3D animation as a new art form for perceptual
animators.
My art research objective is to build a bridge
between perceptual and industrial animators and let both
concepts and techniques be developed parallel to my
artwork. In other words, I fully apply visual perception,
cultural concepts, aesthetic awareness, and animation
technology as well as classical animation principles.

3. Underlying Concepts
3.1 Artist’s Preoccupation
One way in which I think about the relationship
between primitive and modern technology can be

Figure 5, Horse and Sun, 70” x 65”, 2004

3. 2 Art Form Discovery
State-of-the art technology has caused a shock wave
on the traditional and contemporary art forms during the
last two decades. The new digital art forms such as
digital animation, computer art, web interactive art,
multimedia installation, and digital imaging have
emerged and have been recognized.
Museum Curator Christiane Paul described a
distinction between artwork that applies digital
technology as a tool to produce traditional art forms and
artwork that adopts it as a medium to create new types of
art, in her book “Digital Art.” My “digital-Primitive
Art” cannot easily belong to one of these significations,
which mixed digital and primitive technology with
ancient rawhide materials. The “Digital-Primitive Art”
creating a totally new art form with timeless images
using one of the most contemporary media, which are

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

then printed or projected onto one of the most ancient
forms of support. It also opens a new artistic perspective
on the past, present and future.

3.3 Multicultural Interaction
The creative strategy for this project is to explore a
unique artistic viewpoint and to create artworks that will
present early American people's culture and centuries-old
spirituality through a highly distinctive digital
environment using primitive materials.
In the first phase, I conducted studies on early
American spirituality, primitive art, animal rawhides,
digital animation, and digital-printing technology. After
laying this groundwork, I developed a new art form that
has facilitated the creation of a “digital-primitive art.”
Simultaneously, the conceptual thinking related to
digital-primitive art has emerged.
Digital animation provides a way to make the visual
journey very engaging and effective. Besides the
rawhides, natural burls, unique plant materials and old
wood textures are adopted as frame materials.
The digital 3D image creations along with the frame
designs were largely inspired by early American and
Chinese culture, as well as worldwide primitive and
contemporary art.

Developing digital-parchment-printing technologies
are an essential part of the research. As a pioneer
researcher in this field, I faced some incredible technical
challenges, which required considerable time and effort
to solve since there was very little reference material
available. Throughout the process, I have been able to
provide suggestions to printer companies on the
modification of printers to adjust to different parchment
qualities, thickness, and hygroscopicity.
Regarding the digital skills in my artwork,
Softimage/XSI is the primary software for this project.
PhotoShop & Illustrator are used for digital image
creation, and PremierePro, SoundEdit 16 and DPS
Reality are utilized for movie making, sound editing and
composing. In terms of hardware, the Dell Precision
PCs, and the Power MAC/G5s are used in an integrated
fashion.
The centuries-old technologies for creating images
on rawhides are a significant aspect of this exploration;
we normally define these early approaches as
“ethnotechnology” or “primitive technology”. The use
of trimmed and healed animal rawhides is an ancient
process used by indigenous people around the world to
produce soft, durable parchments. Numerous animal
hides have been used, including calf and deer. The hides
were cleaned and disrobed of fur or hair. Meticulous
concentration is required for the scraping process for the
purpose of detaching all unnecessary materials without
stabbing or ripping the hides. Then they are stretched on
a wood frame to be flattened with pumice on the surface.
Finally, the back is sanded down to a perfect thickness
for digital printing and digital projection.

Conclusion
“Digital-Primitive Art” art research is the first
exploration in applying digital and primitive, old and
new, early and modern, ephemeral and timeless
conservatory art concepts, art forms and technologies to
one entity. “By creating a novel synthesis of such diverse
elements, Li Tan provides us with a new perspective on
the past, the present and the future and opens up a range
of new artistic possibilities.” (Dr. Martin Rosenberg)

Reference
[1]

Figure 6, Spiritual Stone, 60” x 72”, 2004

[2]
[3]

4. Digital & Centuries -Old Technologies

[4]

In terms of the relation of new media and old
media, Mr. Lev Manovich discusses the fact that new
media relies on conventions set by old media in his book,
“The Language of New Media.”

[5]
[6]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Rosenberg, M., (2004) LiQin Tan’s “Digital-Primitive
Art,” Stedman Art Gallery, NJ
Paul, C., (2003) Digital Art, Thames & Hudson
Manovich, L., (2002) The Language of New Media, MIT
Press; Reprint edition
Furniss, M. (1998) Art in Motion : Animation
Aesthetics. John Libbey & Co Ltd.
Muybridge, E. (1955) The Human Figure in Motion.
Dover Publications Inc.
Muybridge, E. (1955) Animals in Motion. Dover
Publications Inc.

