Interactive Analysis of Event Data Using Space-Time Cube
Peter Gatalsky, Natalia Andrienko, and Gennady Andrienko
Fraunhofer Institute for Autonomous Intelligent Systems
Schloss Birlinghoven, D-53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
http://www.ais.fraunhofer.de/~gatalsky
{gatalsky@ais.fraunhofer.de, gennady.andrienko@ais.fraunhofer.de}

Abstract
In exploratory data analysis, the choice of tools
depends on the data to be analyzed and the analysis
tasks, i.e. the questions to be answered. The same applies
to design of new analysis tools. In this paper, we
consider a particular type of data: data that describe
transient events having spatial and temporal references,
such as earthquakes, traffic incidents, or observations of
rare plants or animals. We focus on the task of detecting
spatio-temporal patterns in event occurrences. We
demonstrate the insufficiency of the existing techniques
and approaches to event exploration and substantiate the
need in a new exploratory tool. The technique of spacetime cube, which has been earlier proposed for the
visualization of movement in geographical space,
possesses the required properties. However, it must be
implemented so as to allow particular interactive
manipulations: changing the viewing perspective,
temporal focusing, and dynamic linking with a map
display
through
simultaneous
highlighting
of
corresponding symbols. We describe our implementation
of the space-time cube technique and demonstrate by an
example how it can be used for detecting spatio-temporal
clusters of events.

space-time cube, to show life histories of people and how
people interact in space and time. The base of the cube
represents the two-dimensional geographical space while
the cube’s height represents the temporal dimension. At
the time when the concept was introduced, the options
for creating such graphics were limited to manual
methods. This was an obvious limitation of the
approach, since creation of each new diagram was a
laborious drawing exercise. Today, when modern
computer technologies provide much better opportunities
for data visualization, the interest of researchers to
Hägerstrand’s time-geography has revived [2].
Prominent application examples have been made in ITC,
Enschede, the Netherlands [3]. Thus, Figure 1 shows the
representation of the Napoleon’s Russian campaign in
1812. Summarizing all experiments carried out with
space-time cube, a project of dynamic visualization
environment has been proposed [4].

Keywords: space-time-cube, spatio-temporal data,
exploratory data analysis, data visualization

1. Introduction
This paper deals with some issues of exploratory
analysis of spatio-temporal data, that is, data having both
spatial and temporal references. In particular, we focus
on the analysis of events – discrete spatial objects having
relatively short life duration. Examples of events are
earthquakes, traffic incidents, occurrences of diseases, or
observations of rare animals. An important question
arising in analysis of event data is how the events are
distributed in space and time. A proper data
representation is needed for answering this question.
In early 70s Hägerstrand [1] developed a graphic
view on time as an additional spatial dimension. He
suggested a three-dimensional diagram, the so-called

Figure 1. Representation of object movement in a
“space-time cube”. (Source:[4])
Both Hägerstrand and the research team from ITC
applied space-time cube to data concerning movement of
objects, i.e. changes of spatial locations. In this paper, we

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

propose an application of Hägerstrand’s concept of cube
to a different data type, specifically, data about events.
The remainder of the paper is built as follows. In the
second section, we introduce our task-analytic approach
to the design of tools for visual exploratory analysis of
spatio-temporal data. We demonstrate that current
approaches to event representation are insufficient and
there is a need in a new instrument that could properly
support the exploration of spatio-temporal event patterns.
This motivated our attempts to apply the idea of spacetime cube to event data. The third section describes our
implementation of an interactive tool for data analysis
involving data representation in a space-time cube. In the
fourth section, we consider an example of application of
the tool to the search of spatio-temporal clusters of
earthquake occurrences. Finally, we draw some
conclusions and indicate possible directions for future
work.

2. Task-analytical approach to data
visualisation
Effectiveness of data analysis strongly depends on
the selection of proper tools. The right choice, in turn,
depends on the characteristics of the data and on the
analysis tasks that need to be fulfilled, or, in other words,
the questions to be answered. The same applies to the
design of new exploratory tools: data and task
characteristics define the space of design alternatives and
the directions for search.
In [5], we suggested an operational typology of
spatio-temporal data and tasks that can potentially arise
in exploratory analysis of such data. On the basis of this
typology, we cataloged the existing tools and techniques
for visualization and exploration of spatio-temporal data,
i.e. we categorized the tools according to the types of
data and tasks they are suitable for. Here, we give a brief
account of the typology. This will help us to define the
typical tasks arising in analysis of event data,
substantiate the need for a tool like space-time cube, and
compare the tool with other tools and techniques
suggested for event analysis.

2.1. Data and tasks
According to Peuquet [6], spatio-temporal data
involve three major components: space (where), time
(when), and objects (what). Each component consists of
specific elements that may have some properties
(attributes) and be linked by various relationships. A
slightly different division can be found in cartographic
literature, where spatial, temporal, and thematic aspects
of geographical phenomena are distinguished [7]. The
term “thematic” covers non-spatial and non-temporal
properties of geographical objects or phenomena.

In choosing methods for analysis of spatio-temporal
data, their spatial, temporal, and thematic characteristics
play an essential role. Let us briefly enumerate the most
important distinctions. With respect to the spatial
properties, objects or phenomena are often classified into
points, lines, areas, and volumes [8]. Another typology
of spatial phenomena is based on two orthogonal
dimensions:
spatial
continuity
and
spatial
(in)dependence [7][8]. According to the first dimension,
phenomena are characterised as discrete or continuous.
Discrete phenomena occur at isolated locations while
continuous phenomena occur everywhere. According to
the second dimension, phenomena may be classified as
smooth (adjacent locations are dependent) or abrupt
(adjacent locations are independent). Smooth phenomena
change in a gradual fashion while abrupt phenomena
change suddenly. Events can be characterized as discrete
and abrupt phenomena. They are most often considered
as points in space.
Temporal characteristics are related to the existence
of objects/phenomena at different time moments and
variation of their spatial and thematic properties over
time. Geographic phenomena may undergo different
types of changes [9]: existential changes (appearing and
disappearing), changes of spatial properties (location,
shape, size, orientation, altitude, height, gradient, and
volume), and changes of thematic properties, which
include qualitative changes and changes of ordinal or
numeric characteristics (increase and decrease).
Sometimes only one type of changes takes place (or is of
interest for an analyst), but in many cases one needs to
consider two or three types simultaneously. In event
data, existential characteristics are of primary interest,
i.e. when the events appear.
Attributes, i.e. thematic components of spatially
referenced data, are typically distinguished according to
levels of measurement introduced by Stevens [10]:
nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio. Often the categories
“interval” and “ratio” are united into a single category
“quantitative”, or “numeric” [11][7]. Events may have
various properties expressed by different types of
attributes. For example, such events as observations of
rare insects may be described through the following
attributes: the species of the observed insect (a nominal
attribute); the stage of development: egg, larva, pupa, or
adult (an ordinal attribute); the number of individuals
encountered (a numeric attribute).
Like the data characteristics, the tasks (questions)
arising in analysis of spatio-temporal data have also
much to do with the three major components of these
data, i.e. space, time, and objects with their thematic
properties. According to Peuquet, there are three possible
types of questions concerning spatio-temporal data ([6],
p.448):

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

when + where o what: Describe the objects or set
of objects that are present at a given location or set
of locations at a given time or set of times.
x when + what o where: Describe the location or set
of locations occupied by a given object or set of
objects at a given time or set of times.
x where + what o when: Describe the times or set of
times that a given object or set of objects occupied a
given location or set of locations.
This classification corresponds to the notion of
question types introduced by Jacques Bertin: “There are
as many types of questions as components in the
information” ([11], p.10). Another division of questions
proposed by Bertin is according to levels of reading:
elementary, intermediate, and overall. Elementary
questions refer to individual elements of data (e.g.
individual places, time moments, and objects) while
questions of the intermediate and overall levels address
more general characteristics of a phenomenon, e.g. how
it is distributed in space, how it behaves in time, or how
characteristics are distributed over a set of objects.
Koussoulakou and Kraak [12] demonstrate that, in
the case of spatio-temporal data, the distinction
according to the reading levels can be independently
applied to the spatial and to the temporal dimensions of
the data. For example, the question “What is the trend of
changing values at location l?” belongs to the
elementary level in relation to the spatial component and
to the overall level with respect to the temporal
component. An analogous observation can also be made
for the object dimension.
Hence, each of the Peuquet’s general question
schemes of the form A+BoX (where A and B denote
known, or given, data components and X stands for
unknown information) can be further subdivided
according to the level on which the known information is
specified: elementary A and B, elementary A and
overall/intermediate B, overall/intermediate A and
elementary B, and overall/intermediate A and B1.
The focus of this paper is analysis of event data on
the overall level with respect to both space and time. The
corresponding question can be formulated as “What is
the pattern of spatial and temporal distribution of the
events and their thematic properties?” This is a
specialization of the when + where o what question
formula, in which when (time) and where (space) are
considered on the overall level. Let us look which data
visualization techniques are suitable for event data and to
what extent they can help in answering this type of
question.
x

1

In our opinion, there is no principal difference between the
intermediate and overall levels, as defined by Bertin. Both levels
involve consideration of sets rather than individual elements. The
difference is whether the whole set or its subsets are considered.

2.2. Techniques for event exploration
Like any spatial objects, events can be represented
on a map. Maps are indispensable in investigation of
spatial patterns of event occurrence. For a static map,
there are two possibilities: either all events are shown
irrespective of the time of their occurrence or only events
that took place at a selected moment or during a selected
interval. In the first variant, the information about the
time of event occurrences can be shown on the map
using appropriate cartographic representation methods.
Thus, in the system SpaTemp [13], the time of appearing
of an event or the period of its existence can be indicated
by a label placed on a map according to the location of
the event. The “ages” of events may be represented by
variation of colors. However, labels are suitable only for
elementary tasks since they do not foster an integral view
of the spatio-temporal distribution of the events. Color
variation may be helpful when the events are not too
numerous and there is no occlusion of the symbols that
represent the events on the map. Under these conditions,
concentrations of symbols similar in their colors
correspond to spatio-temporal event clusters, which
deserve particular attention as signs of possible event
interactions. However, clusters can only be detected if
events never re-occurred around the same place after a
significant lapse of time, otherwise, even if there is no
symbol occlusion, the mix of differently colored symbols
obstructs seeing clusters. Besides, representing temporal
information by symbol colors reduces the opportunities
for displaying thematic characteristics of events.
The second approach, when only a portion of data
corresponding to a selected time moment or interval is
represented on a map, can be used only in combination
with other techniques that compensate the information
loss. One of them is map iteration, i.e. juxtaposition of
several maps where each map shows events pertinent to a
different time moment or interval. Obviously, the
number of perceptible images that can be simultaneously
shown on a computer screen is limited, and, hence, long
time periods have to be investigated at a rather coarse
temporal resolution. As a result, spatially close event
symbols on a single map may not necessarily signify
temporal closeness. On the other hand, temporally close
events can be occasionally split between two maps.
Another possibility is to combine the display of event
subsets with querying, i.e. interactive tools for subset
selection. In particular, the user should be able to choose
various time moments and intervals, and the map must
be automatically updated to represent the corresponding
events. We would like to mention some interesting
implementations of controls for choosing times that
combine the linear and cyclical views of time
[14][15][16][17].
A specific form of temporal filtering of event data
occurs in the course of map animation. At each display

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

moment, the map shows events that took place at some
real time moment or during some interval. This moment
or interval is shifted forth or back in time, and the map is
correspondingly updated.
Temporal filtering, either through querying or
through animation, is very helpful when events are
numerous. However, the user sees only a portion of data
(a time slice) at each moment. In order to get an overall
picture of spatio-temporal distribution, the user has to
memorize many slices and mentally integrate them.
Another difficulty is to select an appropriate temporal
resolution. If the map shows only events that occurred at
some moment or during a very short interval, the events
may be too sparse for observing any clusters. If the
interval is too long, “false” clusters may appear. Even if
the interval is neither too short nor too long, there may
be clusters stretching over several time slices. This
causes difficulties in estimating their spatial and
temporal extents and the number of events involved.
Besides, while it is relatively easy to focus the attention
on a single place where several events co-occur, it may
be problematic to keep the eye on the whole territory.
Among the techniques suggested for dealing with a
large number of events is data aggregation. The tool
described in [15] supports various ways of data
aggregation: spatial, temporal, and categorical (i.e.
according to types of the events). The software displays
summary characteristics of the aggregates, such as the
total number of events or their average duration, and
allows the user to “drill down” into each aggregate in
order to see data about the individual events. The
summary data about spatially aggregated events (e.g.
traffic incidents aggregated by road fragments) are
shown on an interactive map by symbols the size of
which is proportional to the number of events. Two
different types of temporal aggregation are supported: by
days of week and by calendar dates. In the first case,
aggregates unite all traffic incidents that occurred on the
same day of the week irrespective of calendar dates. The
aggregates are represented by bars on a bar chart with the
height of a bar proportional to the number of the events.
In the second case, events that occurred on the same date
are grouped together and shown on a calendar display
using square symbols with sizes proportional to the
numbers of incidents. It may be noticed that spatial
aggregation entails a loss of the temporal information,
and vice versa. Hence, this technique is unsuitable for
exploring spatio-temporal distribution, although it can
provide valuable insights concerning the distribution of
events in space or time taken separately.
There is a principal possibility to reduce information
losses resulting from aggregation by applying temporal
aggregation not to the whole territory but to its parts.
Thus, in the case of traffic incidents, one could build a
bar chart or line graph representing the variation of the
number of event occurrences over time for each road

fragment. This would allow the user to compare temporal
patterns of event occurrences at different places.
However, this only provides a sort of “space slices”
analogous to time slices resulting from temporal
filtering. From such space slices, one can gain
knowledge concerning temporal grouping of events at
different places but not concerning spatial grouping of
events close in time.

2.3. Need for the cube
As we have demonstrated, none of the approaches
suggested thus far for event visualization and analysis
sufficiently supports the task of searching for spatiotemporal patterns. This task requires an overall view of
both space and time, which is difficult to reconstruct
from spatial or temporal slices. Hence, there is a need in
a tool capable to represent simultaneously the whole
space-time continuum and the positions of events in this
continuum. The idea of space-time cube is an obvious
response to this need.
In the examples cited in the introduction, space-time
cube is used to represent data about spatial movements
and spatial interaction, i.e. changes of spatial properties
of persistent discrete objects. According to this
technique, points in three-dimensional space, where the
vertical dimension corresponds to time, represent the
positions of an object at different time moments. Lines
connect the points corresponding to consecutive
moments. Besides trajectories of object movement, a
cube display allows the user to explore the speed of
movement. In this representation, gently sloping path
segments indicate fast movement, i.e. long distance in
space traveled in short time, while steep segments
correspond to slow motion. Vertical lines occur when an
object stays for some time period in the same place.
Hence, the cube exposes certain patterns that provide
valuable information about characteristics of object
movement. One may expect that representation of events
in a cube will also foster detection of interesting patterns.
However, events are a different type of phenomenon as
compared to object movement, and the types of patterns
to look for are also different.

3. Interactive space-time cube display in
CommonGIS
Events can be represented in a cube as circles (or
other symbols) placed vertically according to the time of
their occurrence. Figure 2 shows our implementation of
the space-time cube display of events, which is available
in the system CommonGIS [18]. In this implementation,
the earliest events are at the bottom of the cube and the
latest at the top. Variation of circle sizes or colors can
additionally represent thematic characteristics of the
events, for example, magnitudes of earthquakes.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

corresponding objects are identically marked in all
displays when the user selects them with the mouse in
one of the displays. This technique is illustrated in Figure
3: the user has selected a spatial cluster of events in the
map and can see in the space-time cube how the events
are distributed in time. In both the map and the cube
these events are marked by circles with thick black
borders. Similarly, it is possible to select event symbols
in the cube display and see where these events are on the
map or other displays.

Figure 2. Data about events are represented in a
“space-time cube”. The vertical positions of the
circles correspond to the times when the events
occurred. Circle sizes or colors may reflect thematic
characteristics of the events.
With this representation, a sequence of events that
occurred around the same place shortly one after another
would be translated into a chain of vertically aligned
circles. In general, any three-dimensional shapes
emerging due to visual proximity of event symbols
deserve attention as an indication of possible event
interactions, for example, inclined chains or conical
structures. However, it should be borne in mind that
visual grouping of symbols can be also a mere projection
effect resulting from the representation of the threedimensional space on the two-dimensional computer
screen. Therefore, our cube display allows the user to
change her/his viewing perspective into the cube.
The time period under investigation may be rather
long. “Pressing” the entire period into the height of the
cube results in significant symbol overlapping and
display cluttering, when hardly any pattern can be
visible. Therefore, we made it possible to select a time
subinterval and see only events that occurred during this
time. The selected subinterval can be represented by the
whole height of the cube available. The user can shift the
subinterval along the time axis. In response, the scene is
dynamically redrawn. As compared to temporal filtering
on a map, the space-time cube display preserves the
information about relative times of event occurrences.
Another benefit is reduced overlapping of event symbols
when several events occur in the same place at close but
different times.
An important feature of the space-time cube
presentation is its dynamic linking with a map as well as
graphical displays of other types. This means that

Figure 3. The “space-time cube” is dynamically
linked to the map display by simultaneous
highlighting of corresponding symbols.
For determining the time frame of some observed
behavior pattern, such as vertical symbol alignment, it is
convenient to use the movable plane that visually
separates events having occurred before a specified time
moment from later events. In Figures 2 and 3, this plane
with the map drawn on it lies at the bottom of the cube
but it can be lifted to the position corresponding to a
user-selected moment. This technique also supports
comparison of time frames of two or more events or
patterns.
The space-time cube reacts to zooming and panning
of the map and in this way supports zooming in the
spatial dimension. Additionally, the space-time cube is
linked to a dynamic query device that allows one to
select events with specific characteristics, for example,
only earthquakes with high magnitude. The diversity of
mechanisms for linking various displays in CommonGIS
is described in [19]. We stress tool linking as a central
feature of the system, which allows users to carry out
sophisticated data analyses.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

In the following section, we describe an example
application of the tool to data about earthquake
occurrences.

symbol alignments that can be seen in Figure 4 do not
actually correspond to event clusters: the alignments
disappear after changing the viewpoint.

4. Analysis of earthquakes in Marmara,
Western Turkey
The example dataset is a catalogue of earthquakes
that occurred during the period from the beginning of
1976 until the end of 1999 in Marmara region (Western
Turkey). The data have been previously cleaned, in
particular, aftershocks removed. The catalogue contains
10550 events. Each data record includes the geographic
location of an earthquake, the time of occurrence, and a
few thematic attributes such as the depth of the epicenter,
magnitude, intensity and some other seismic
characteristics. An earthquake can be treated as an
instant event: its duration is negligibly short in
comparison to the whole time interval under
investigation. Here, we are interested whether any spatiotemporal patterns can be observed in earthquake
occurrence rather than in characteristics of individual
earthquakes.
The major problem we encounter is that the
earthquakes are too numerous. When we represent them
all on a map, no spatial patterns can be seen but only a
great number of overlapping earthquake symbols
covering the whole territory. The map becomes suitable
for data exploration only after applying temporal or other
forms of filtering. The same problem appears when an
attempt is made to display all 10550 earthquakes in a
space-time cube. In this case, the height of the cube
represents the whole 25-year time period. The scale
factor on the vertical axis has to be very small, and, as a
result, many events have the same vertical position in the
cube even when they are separated by quite a long time
interval. Like the map, the cube is overfilled with
overlapping event symbols. Hence, for seeing any
patterns, temporal filtering becomes indispensable.
For temporal filtering, we use the temporal focusing
control shown in Figure 4, top. We select a time interval
of the length of about 4 months and let the system stretch
this interval to the whole height of the cube. This
significantly reduces symbol overlapping and makes the
space-time cube display quite legible (Figure 4).
Now we can investigate the patterns formed by the
earthquake symbols coming close together. When some
bunch of circles attracts our attention, we check whether
the closeness of the circles does not result from the
projection. For this purpose, we select the circles by
dragging a frame around them. The circles are switched
to the “selected” state, i.e. marked by thick black
borders, as is shown in Figure 3. After that, we change
the viewing perspective and look whether the marked
symbols still group together or dissipate. It should be
admitted that the latter happens quite often. Thus, the

Figure 5. Temporal focusing applied to the spacetime cube display. The user has selected a 4-month
time interval, which is now represented by the
whole height of the cube.
However, we remember that the cube does not show
us the whole dataset but only the initial 4 months of the
25-year period. We need to investigate the whole period.
For this purpose, we slowly move the 4-month interval
along the time bar (Figure 4, top). This results in the
cube being dynamically redrawn. The visual effect is that
the circles representing the earthquakes are slowly
moving from top to bottom reminding a snowfall. If
some interesting symbol arrangement emerges, we have
sufficient time to notice it while it is “falling down”.
When some symbol bunch attracts our attention, we
immediately stop moving the focus interval. Then we
verify the finding by interactively selecting the symbols
and altering the viewpoint. We also exploit the link
between the cube and the map for refining our selection
by means of deselecting spatially distant events.
In this manner, we eventually detect some potentially
interesting clusters in space and time. Thus, Figure 5
shows a chain of events selected in the cube after its
refinement with the help of the map. The same events are
also marked on the map in Figure 6.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 5. A probable spatio-temporal cluster has
been detected and selected in the space-time cube.
The circle in the middle of the chain has been
unselected as irrelevant: the corresponding
earthquake actually stands apart from the others
and appears close only because of the projection.

Figure 6. The same cluster of events as in Figure 5
is marked on a map. On the right, the dates and
magnitudes of the selected events are displayed.
It can be clearly seen that the events form a spatial
cluster on the territory of the province Kutahya (in the
center of the map). On the right of the map, the dates and
magnitudes of the selected earthquakes are shown. It
may be noticed that all the earthquakes occurred during
the time interval from May, 4, 1976 to May, 24, 1976.
The strongest earthquake occurred on May, 12. Its

magnitude was 5.9, and it was fourth in the sequence of
events. It was followed by four weaker events.
The spatial and temporal closeness of the earthquakes
suggests that there might be some interactions between
these events or they might have a common origin.
Unfortunately, we do not have sufficient domain
knowledge for guessing about the meaning of this and
other patterns. However, we believe that a seismologist
would be interested to detect such sequences of
earthquakes.
If we continue our exploration, we would find other
potentially interesting groupings of earthquake
occurrences in space and time, for example, a sequence
of 7 earthquakes with magnitudes from 2.9 to 3.3 that
occurred near Izmir between September 24 and October
6, 1976, or a chain of 6 earthquakes on the north of
Kutahya province between the 1st and the 20th of July,
1990. We can conclude that the tool potentially allows an
analyst to find spatio-temporal event clusters. However,
cluster detection in a real-size dataset occurs to be quite a
laborious process requiring deep concentration.

5. Conclusion
Visual exploration of spatio-temporal data requires
tools that can help users find answers to different types
of questions that may arise in relation to such data. In
this paper we described interactive space-time cube - a
tool that represents time as an additional spatial
dimension. We have found this analytical tool useful for
visual exploration of spatio-temporal patterns of events.
By an example of earthquakes, we have demonstrated
that the space-time cube display allows one to detect
sequences of events that occurred closely in space within
short time intervals. However, the cube display would be
less helpful without the link to a map by simultaneous
highlighting of corresponding symbols. For exploration
of long time intervals, temporal focusing is essential.
In our implementation, the cube display can also
represent time-irrelevant numeric attributes of persistent
spatial objects. In particular, we made some experiments
with applying this visualization technique for multicriteria decision making problems. However, details of
this study are out of the scope of this paper.
In our experiments with the tool we encountered
some problems. Thus, during earthquake exploration, we
have found it quite difficult to detect event clusters by
applying only temporal focusing. The process required
much time and deep concentration It was also quite
difficult to select the right size of the “time window” for
the focusing without having any expectations concerning
the likely temporal extents of possible clusters.
To facilitate the work on pattern investigation, it
would be good to provide some methods for automatic
cluster detection under user’s control. The user could
specify, for example, certain thresholds for temporal and

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

spatial “closeness” between events and a minimum
cluster size, and the tool would try to find event subsets
satisfying these constraints. The tool could also
automatically search for periods of the overall high or
low activity of the phenomenon.
We realize that usability studies should be carried out
to check if the space-time-cube tool is understandable
and convenient for users and effectively supports the
analytical tasks it was designed for. We intend to do such
studies in the future.

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

6. Acknowledgements
[11]

We are grateful to Prof. M.-J. Kraak (ITC,
Netherlands) for interesting and fruitful discussions
during the last years concerning visualization of spatiotemporal data. They gave us an inspiration for
developing new and improving our existing analytical
tools, in particular, the one described in the paper. We
also thank Dr. Valeri Gitis and his colleagues from the
Institute of Information Transmission Problems, RAS,
Moscow, Russia, for the earthquake dataset used in our
experiments. The presented work is partly supported by
the European Commission projects GIMMI (IST-200134245; http://services.txt.it/gimmi/) and SPIN!-“Spatial
Mining for Data of Public Interest” (IST-1999-10536;
http://www.ccg.leeds.ac.uk/spin/).

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

T. Hägerstrand. What about people in regional science?
Papers, Regional Science Association, 24, 7-21. 1970.
N.R. Hedley, C.H. Drew, E.A. Arfin, and A. Lee.
Hägerstrand
Revisited:
Interactive
Space-Time
Visualizations of Complex Spatial Data. Informatica: An
International Journal of Computing and Informatics, 23
(2), 155-168. May 1999.
What has ITC done with Minard’s map? URL:
http://www.itc.nl/personal/kraak/1812/minard-itc.htm
M.-J. Kraak. The space-time-cube revisited from a
geovisualization perspective. In Proceedings of the 21st
International
Cartographic
Conference
(ICC)
“Cartographic Renaissance”, Durban, South Africa,
1988-1996. August 2003.
N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and P. Gatalsky.
Exploratory
Spatio-Temporal
Visualization:
an
Analytical Review, Journal of Visual Languages and
Computing, special issue on Visual Data Mining, 14 (6),
503-541. 2003.
D.J. Peuquet. It’s about time: a conceptual framework for
the representation of temporal dynamics in geographic

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

information systems, Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 84 (3), 441-461. 1994.
A.M. MacEachren. How Maps Work: Representation,
Visualization, and Design. New York, The Guilford
Press. 1995.
T.A. Slocum. Thematic Cartography and Visualization,
New Jersey, Prentice Hall, Uper Saddle River. 1999
C. Blok. Monitoring Change: Characteristics of Dynamic
Geo-spatial Phenomena for Visual Exploration, Ch.
Freksa et al. (Eds.): Spatial Cognition II, LNAI 1849,
Berlin Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 16-30. 2000.
S.S. Stevens. On the theory of scales of measurement.
Science, 103, 677-680. 1946.
J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics. Diagrams, Networks,
Maps. (English translation by W.J. Berg). Madison, The
University of Wisconsin Press. 1983. (original French
edition: J. Bertin. Sémiologie Graphique. Paris, Mouton.
1967)
A. Koussoulakou, M.J. Kraak. Spatio-temporal maps and
cartographic communication. The Cartographic Journal,
29, 101-108. 1992.
D. Stojanovic, S. Djordjevic-Kajan, A. Mitrovic, and Z.
Stojanovic. Cartographic Visualization and Animation of
the Dynamic Geographic Processes and Phenomena, in
Proceedings of 19th International Cartographic
Conference, vol. 1, 739-746. 1999.
R. Edsall and D. Peuquet. A Graphical User Interface for
the Integration of Time into GIS. Proceedings of the 1997
American Congress of Surveying and Mapping Annual
Convention and Exhibition, Seattle, WA, 182-189. 1997.
A. Fredrikson, C. North, C. Plaisant, and B.
Shneiderman. Temporal, geographic and categorical
aggregations viewed through coordinated displays: a case
study with highway incident data. In Proceedings of
Workshop on New Paradigms in Information
Visualization and Manipulation (NPIVM’99), New York,
ACM Press, 26-34. 1999.
M. Harrower, A.L. Griffin, and A.M. MacEachren.
Temporal Focusing and Temporal Brushing: Assessing
their Impact in Geographic Visualization, In Proceedings
of 19th International Cartographic Conference, vol. 1,
729-738. 1999.
M. Harrower, A.M. MacEachren, and A.L. Griffin.
Developing a Geographic Visualization Tool to Support
Earth Science Learning, Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 27 (4), 279-293. 2000.
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, and H. Voss. GIS for
Everyone: the CommonGIS project and beyond,
M.Peterson (ed.) Maps and the Internet, Elsevier Science,
131-146. 2003.
N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko. Informed Spatial Decisions
through Coordinated Views. Information Visualization, 2
(4), 270-285. 2003.

