Time-tunnel: Visual Analysis Tool for Time-series Numerical Data and Its Aspects
as Multimedia Presentation Tool
Mina Akaishi
RCAST, University of Tokyo
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8904, JAPAN
mina@ai.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yoshihiro Okada
Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University
6-1 Kasuga-koen, Kasuga, Fukuoka, 816-8580, JAPAN
okada@i.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Intelligent Cooperation and Control, PRESTO, JST
Abstract
This paper proposes a new data analysis tool called
Time-tunnel. Time-tunnel visualizes any numbers of timeseries numerical data as individual charts in a 3D virtual
space. Through direct manipulations on a computer screen,
the user easily puts more than two different charts
overlapped together to compare them in order to recognize
the similarity or the difference among those data.
Simultaneously a radar chart among those data at any time
point is displayed to recognize the similarity and the
correlation among them. In this way, using Time-tunnel,
the user can visually analyse multiple time-series numerical
data through interactive manipulations on a computer
screen.
Time-tunnel has not only aspects as a data analysis tool
but also aspects as a chart-based multimedia presentation
tool because Time-tunnel also treats multimedia data, i.e.,
texts, images, sounds and movies, as additional information
represented by tags located at any point of charts. In this
paper, the authors also describe the usefulness of Timetunnel as a multimedia presentation tool.
Key words
Visualization tool, Analysis tool, Multi-charts tool,
Multimedia presentation tool, IntelligentBox

1. Introduction
This paper treats a new visual analysis tool for time-series
multidimensional, numerical data. Recently, computers are
used everywhere and always for the management and the

control of various types of systems and human activities, and
then, as a result of such computer work, various time-series
numerical data are recorded and stored. At the present we
have a lot of digital numerical data all over the world, e.g.,
economical data. To analyze such data is important for us,
especially for economists or historical scientists. We need
any tool that helps us to analyze such data. In this paper, we
propose a new data analysis tool called Time-tunnel.
Time-tunnel visualizes any numbers of time-series
numerical data as individual charts in a 3D virtual space.
The user easily puts more than two different charts
overlapped together to compare them in order to recognize
the similarity or the difference among those data.
Simultaneously a radar chart among those data at any time
point is displayed in the same 3D space to recognize the
similarity and the correlation among them. In this way, the
user can visually analyze multiple time-series numerical data
through interactive manipulations on a computer screen.
Time-tunnel is developed using IntelligentBox[1].
IntelligentBox is a 3D graphics software development system
and provides various functionalities as software components
called boxes. Time-tunnel is provided as the composition of
several boxes. Time-tunnel has aspects as a chart-based
multimedia presentation tool besides aspects as a data
analysis tool because Time-tunnel can manage multimedia
data, i.e., texts, images, sounds and movies, as additional
information of chart data by the use of particular boxes,
which treats multimedia data. In this paper, we also
describe the usefulness of Time-tunnel as a multimedia
presentation tool.

[Related work]
Excel, spread sheet of Microsoft Corp., provides
functionality to create various types of chart graphs for the
visualization of numerical data. Among them includes 3D

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

bar charts. The problem is that it does not support more than
4-dimensional data.
For the visualization of multidimensional data, Inselberg
and Dimsdale introduced Parallel Coordinates [2], which
visualizes multiple data records as multiple poly-lines on the
same 2D plane at the same time. After their proposal of
Parallel Coordinates, many modified versions having a
variety of additional features were proposed [3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Our Time-tunnel visualizes multiple charts and can put them
overlapped together. Therefore, if one chart is regarded as
the visualization of one multidimensional data record, Timetunnel can be used as the same visual analysis tool as
Parallel Coordinates.
Another popular data analysis method is based on star
chart or radar chart. As the similar tools, there are Star
Glyphs of XmdvTool [8] and Stardinates Tool [9].
Stardinates Tool has combined feature of Parallel
Coordinates and Glyphs [8]. Our Time-tunnel has combined
feature of Parallel Coordinates and star chart (radar chart)
visualization tool. Moreover, Time-tunnel has also aspects
as a multimedia presentation tool. This point is the main
difference from other visual analysis tools. In the following
we describe our Time-tunnel visualization tool in more detail.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 explains essential mechanism of IntelligentBox because
Time-tunnel is developed as its application. Section 3
describes details of Time-tunnel. Section 4 presents data
analysis examples using Time-tunnel. Finally we conclude
the paper in Section 5.

2. Essential Mechanisms of IntelligentBox
IntelligentBox employs the following essential mechanisms
inherited from IntelligentPad[10], which is a 2D synthetic
media system since IntelligentBox is an extension of
IntelligentPad to 3D graphics applications.

2.1 Model-Display object (MD) structure
As shown in Figure 1, each box consists of two objects, a
model and a display object. This structure is called MD
(Model-Display object) structure. A model holds state
values of a box. They are stored in variables called slots. A
display object defines how the box appears on a computer
screen and also defines how the box reacts to user operations.
Figure 1 also shows messages between a display object
and a model. This is an example of RotationBox.
RotationBox has a slot named ‘ratio’ that holds a double
precision number, which means a rotation angle. This value
is normalized into zero to one. One means one rotation.
Through direct manipulations on a box, its associated slot
value changes. Furthermore, its visual image simultaneously
changes according to the slot value change. In this way, a

Fig. 1. MD structure of box and its internal
messages.

Fig. 2. Standard messages between boxes.
box reacts to user's manipulations according to its
functionality.

2.2 Message-sending protocol for slot-connections
Figure 2 illustrates data linkage concept among boxes. As
shown in the figure, each box has multiple slots. Its one slot
can be connected to one of the slots of other box. This
connection is called slot-connection. Slot-connection is
carried out by some messages when there is a parent-child
relationship between two boxes. There are three standard
messages, i.e., a set message, a gimme message and an
update message. These messages have the following
formats:
(1) Parent box set <slotname> <value>.
(2) Parent box gimme <slotname>.
(3) Child box update.
A <value> in a format (1) represents any value, and a
<slotname> in formats (1) and (2) represents a user-selected
slot of the parent box that receives these two messages.
A set message writes a child box slot value into its parent box
slot. A gimme message reads a slot value from a parent box
and sets the value into its child box slot. Update messages
are issued from a parent box to all of its child boxes to tell
them that the parent box slot value has changed.
Each box has three main flags that control the above
message flow, i.e., a set flag, a gimme flag, and an update

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Fig. 3. System components of Time-tunnel.
flag. These flags are properties of a display object. A box
works as an input device if its set flag is set to true.
Contrarily a box works as an output device if its gimme
flag is set to true. A box sends update messages if its
update flag is set to true. Then child boxes take an action
depending upon the states of the set flag and the gimme
flag after they receive an update message or after they
individually change their slot values.

3. Time-tunnel
In this section, we describe system configuration of Timetunnel, its components and how Time-tunnel works for the
analysis of multiple time-series numerical data. As well we
describe aspects of Time-tunnel as a multimedia presentation
tool.

3.1 System configuration
Figure 3 shows the component structure of Time-tunnel and
Figure 4 shows a screen snapshot of actual Time-tunnel.
Time-tunnel consists of three main types of boxes, i.e., datawing, time-plane and time-bar.
(1) Data-wing is a box that has a shape like a sheet. Datawing displays one time-series numerical data as a chart
on its sheet. For the visualization of multidimensional
data, the user can use multiple data-wings as he/she
wants. Each data-wing is connected to time-bar by its
hinge. The hinge is also a box that has a rotation
functionality called RotationBox.
Therefore, by
rotation operations on data-wings, the user can put
multiple charts overlapped together to compare them as
later shown in Figure 7. Time-series numerical data of
each data-wing is sent to time-bar through RotationBox.
(2) Time-plane is a box that also has a shape like a sheet.
Time-plane is connected to time-bar vertically to data-

Fig. 4. Screen snapshot of Time-tunnel.
wings. Usually three time-planes are necessary as
shown in Figure 3. Two time-planes are used to
specify a time region, i.e., a begin time point and an end
time point. Correlation points between any two
adjacent charts are displayed inside the time region.
The remaining time-plane is used for displaying a radar
chart. Its position data is sent to time-bar to specify a
time of data among charts to be displayed as a radar
chart. Actually time-plane is connected to time-bar
through ExpandBox. Time-plane moves along time-bar
by the user manipulations. So, ExpandBox is used as
the parent box of each time-plane.
(3) Time-bar is a box that has a thin, long cylindrical shape.
Time-bar works as a time pivot of data-wings. It
collects multiple time-series numerical data from each
data-wing and displays a radar chart on one of timeplanes. It also displays correlation data between any
two adjacent data-wings as scattered points in the time
region specified by the two remaining time-planes.
Parent-child relationships among data-wings, time-planes
and time-bar are as shown in Figure 3. RotationBox
works as the hinge and the parent of data-wing, and timebar is the parent of each RotationBox. ExpandBox
becomes the parent of time-plane, and it works for
positioning the time-plane.

3.2 Detail of each component
This subsection describes the detail of each component,
data-wing, time-plane and time-bar. We explain what kinds
of roles and what kinds of slots those boxes have. We also
describe their manipulation interfaces.

1) Data-wing

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Fig. 5. Interfaces on data-wing.
First of all, data-wing has to keep one time-series numerical
data in its certain slot called “chart”. Data-wing makes a
chart from the data stored in the slot and displays the chart
on its surface. See Figure 4. For the case that data to be
visualized is stored in a file, another particular box called
FileSelectionBox is attached to data-wing to specify the file
name. Then data-wing reads the data and stores in its
dedicated slot.
Figure 5 shows interfaces of data-wing. Data-wing has
many other slots store additional information to display the
required style of a chart. Several general purpose boxes, e.g.,
RotationBoxes, PushButtonBoxes, ToggleSwitchBoxes are
attached to data-wing and used to control such slots values.

Aspects as multimedia presentation tool:
One time-series numerical data is represented as the
sequence of multiple pairs of a date-and-time value and its
corresponding numerical value. Data-wing displays a chart
by using a numerical value attribute. A horizontal axis is
corresponding to a date-and-time attribute, and a vertical axis
is corresponding to a numerical value attribute. One set of a
date-and-time value and a numerical value indicates one
point of a chart, and also each point data can have a label, an
explanatory note, media data as additional attributes.
Arbitrarily the user can use such additional attribute data.
These attributes have data type as follows.
㨯 Date-and-time: Date & Time,
㨯 Numerical value: Float number,
㨯 Label: String,
㨯 Explanatory note: String,
㨯 Multimedia data: MM.
A character string stored as a label attribute is displayed at
the same position of the corresponding point on a chart.
Character strings always appear in the horizontal direction
perpendicularly to the view direction. Even if the user
rotates data-wing, he/she can read labels on it. Furthermore,
when the user moves a mouse-device pointer close to one of

Fig. 6. Example as multimedia presentation tool.
the points on a chart, character strings stored as an
explanatory note attribute of the corresponding point will
appear near the mouse pointer on a screen. As for a
multimedia data attribute, a file name of various media data
should be stored. Similarly to the explanatory note attribute,
when the user moves a mouse-device pointer close to one of
the points on a chart, the system checks the file name of the
multimedia data attribute of the point, and automatically
invokes a function corresponding to the extension of the file
name, i.e., *.bmp, *.wav and *.avi. The function reads the
specified multimedia data file and takes an adequate action,
e.g., renders 2D image, plays a sound, plays a movie and so
on. In practice, left side boxes in Figure 5 are used for such
multimedia management functions. As an example of a
multimedia presentation tool, figure 6 shows a screen
snapshot of the case when rendering PowerPoint sheets as
bitmap images on data-wings.

2) Time-plane
As previously mentioned, time-planes are used to specify
time points necessary to display a radar chart and correlation
points among multidimensional numerical data kept in
multiple data-wings. Time-plane has only one slot value
called center_point that means its center position. This data
is sent to time-bar and used to calculate a begin time point or
an end time point of a time range for displaying correlation
points, or a time point for displaying a radar chart. Three
time-planes are used for specifying these time points. These
three time-planes are the same type of box but their slotconnections are different, and then play a different role.

3) Time-bar
Time-bar plays an important role so that it has many slots.
As described above, there are three slots, i.e., radar_chart slot,
begin_time slot and end_time slot, to be connected to time-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

plane slot. Radar_chart slot means a time pint necessary for
displaying a radar chart. begin_time slot and end_time slot
mean a begin time and an end time of a time region inside
which correlation points to be displayed. Center_point slot
of one of the three time-planes is connected to one of these
three slots of time-bar. The remaining slots of time-bar are a
color slot and a size slot. These mean the color and the
thickness of a radar chart respectively.

4. Data Analysis Examples
In this section we present two data analysis ways. One is to
put multiple data-wings overlapped together in order to
analyze the similarity among them by visually comparing
them. Another one is to display a radar chart among
multiple numerical data at any time point of the time attribute
in order to look at the similarity and the correlation among
them.

4.1 Data analysis by overlapping data-wings
Figure 7 shows three data-wings located at the same position
and overlapped together. This layout is easily built by
manually rotate each of data-wings on a computer screen.
Each data-wing can be transparent or semi-transparent in
order to make the user see all the charts through data-wings
as shown in the figure. Then the user can compare multiple

Fig. 7. Multiple data-wings overlapped together.
time-series numerical data and analyze them. In the practical
use, the user can compare the charts by changing the display
region of each chart, that is, horizontal/vertical positions, size
and so on. This is also possible by manual operations on the
interfaces shown in Figure 5.

4.2 Data analysis using radar charts
Figure 8 shows six screen snapshots of Time-tunnel. Each of
three upper snapshots indicates a radar chart at different time
point. Their view directions are the same as Time-bar, that is,

Fig. 8. Data analysis using radar chart view of Time-tunnel.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

perpendicularly to Time-planes. Each of three lower
snapshots is corresponding to its above, upper snapshot.
Their difference is only the view direction. Lower snapshots
indicate a different time position of Time-plane, and then
each of upper snapshots shows a different radar chart. As
previously explained, Time-plane for the radar chart can be
moved along Time-bar interactively by the user
manipulations. So the user can look at the similarity or the
relationship among multiple time-series numerical data
through changing the time point to display the radar chart.
As shown in the figure, correlation points between any
two adjacent chart data of data-wings are also displayed and
the user can understand the correlation between them. For
example, correlation points between red-colored data-wing
and green colored data-wing make a thin, short line shape.
This means the strong correlation between them. Actually,
the correlation between red- and blue-colored data-wings,
and the correlation between blue- and green-colored datawings are also strong in this example.

4.3 Collaborative data analysis using RoomBox
As previously mentioned, our Time-tunnel is developed
using IntelligentBox, which provides various software
components called boxes. For easily building collaborative
operable environments, IntelligentBox provides a particular
box called RoomBox[11]. RoomBox has a slot named
‘event’ which holds a current user-operation event operated
on its descendant boxes. Multiple RoomBoxes existing on a
different computer can share user-operation events with each
other through messages passed via a network. Therefore,
multiple distributed RoomBoxes virtually provide users with
a shared 3D space. In this way, using RoomBoxes, multiple
users using a different computer can collaboratively operate
Time-tunnel existing in such a shared 3D space.

5. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we proposed a new 3D visualization tool called
Time-tunnel. Time-tunnel visualizes any numbers of timeseries numerical data as individual charts in a 3D virtual
space. More than two different charts are put overlapped
together to compare them in order to recognize the similarity
or the difference among them. A radar chart among those
data at any time point is simultaneously displayed to look at
the similarity or the correlation among them. With using
Time-tunnel, the user can analyze data through interactive
manipulations on a computer screen.
Since Time-tunnel is developed using IntelligentBox and
IntelligentBox provides various software components, i.e.,
boxes, support multimedia data, Time-tunnel with such
components has aspects as a multimedia presentation tool.
In this paper, we described those aspects. Furthermore,
IntelligentBox provides RoomBox dedicated for easy

building collaborative operable environments. With the
support of RoomBox, collaborative analysis by multiple
users for multiple numerical data or multidimensional data is
possible.
As future works, we have to evaluate the usefulness of
Time-tunnel by asking many users to actually use it for their
analysis of multiple numerical data or multidimensional data.
We also have to find practical usage of Time-tunnel as a
multimedia presentation tool in order to clarify the
usefulness.

References
[1] Y. Okada, and Y. Tanaka, “IntelligentBox: A
Constructive Visual Software Development System
for Interactive 3D Graphic Applications,” Proc. of
Computer Animation '95, IEEE CS Press, pp.114125, 1995.
[2] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale, “Parallel Coordinates:
A Tool for Visualizing Multidimensional
Geometry,” Proc. IEEE Visualization 1990, IEEE
CS Press, pp. 361-378, 1990.
[3] Y.-H. Fua, M.O. Ward and E.A. Rundensteiner,
“Hierarchical Parallel Coordinates for Exploration of
Large Datasets,” Proc. IEEE Visualization ’99, IEEE
CS Press, pp. 43-50, 1999.
[4] H. Siirtola, “Direct Manipulation of Parallel
Cordinates,” Proc. Information Visualization IV’00,
IEEE CS Press, pp. 373-378, 2000.
[5] G. Falkman, “Information visualization in clinical
Odontology:
multidimensional
analysis
and
interactive data exploration”, Artificial Intelligence
in Medicine, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 133-158, 2001.
[6] H. Hauser, F. Ledermann and H. Doleisch, “Angular
Brushing of Extended Parallel Coordinates,” Proc.
IEEE InfoVis 2002, IEEE CS Press, pp. 127-130,
2002.
[7] M. Graham and J. Kennedy, “Using Curves to
Enhance Parallel Coordinate Visualizations,” Proc.
Information Visualization IV’03, IEEE CS Press, pp.
10-16, 2003.
[8] http://davis.wpi.edu/~xmdv/news.html
[9] M. Lanzenberger and S. Miksch, “The Stardinates –
Visualizing Highly Structured Data,” Proc. of
Information Visualization IV’03, IEEE CS Press, pp.
47-52, 2003.
[10] Y. Tanaka, “Meme Media and a World Wide Meme
Pool,” Proc. of ACM Multimedia ’96, pp. 175-186,
1996.
[11] Y. Okada, and Y. Tanaka, “Collaborative
Environments in IntelligentBox for Distributed 3D
Graphic Applications,” The Visual Computer (CGS
special issue), Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 140-152, 1998.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

