A Semantic Approach for User Depending Information Visualization
Dirk Burmeister, Stephan Grimm, Joerg Haist
Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics
Fraunhoferstr. 5
64283 Darmstadt
{Dirk.Burmeister, Stephan.Grimm, Joerg.Haist}@igd.fraunhofer.de
Abstract
This paper intends to generalize given techniques in
modeling semantic content according to the purpose of
transferring them from industrial application scenarios
to the requirements of design for all.
User groups like deaf people assimilate information
in a different manner than hearing ones .In [1] several
requirements of deaf users of information visualization
are described as a basis for barrier free technology.
In this paper the author wants to engross his thesis
according to a project he is working for. In the project
WIDE [2] two user groups – designers and engineers in
industrial product design and development - have
different views on the search results according their
needs and interests.
WIDE is an EU-funded project (IST-2001-34417).

make user queries “understood” by the underlying
information sources. In the same way the result of a
query is semantically enriched by the system and
translated to the user’s terminology. Using agent
technology, queries are dynamically distributed to
potential information sources and results are collected
and assembled. The system architecture is sketched in
Figure 1.

1. Introduction
WIDE is information retrieval software built using
modern technologies of the Semantic Web. User groups
normally have different conceptions and terminologies
for a shared domain, what is often an obstacle to
successful collaboration of specialist departments. An
example here is the cooperation of designers and
engineers in the automobile industry. Although working
in the same domain, these different user groups do not
have the same backgrounds and they use different
terminologies to talk about the same things.
The WIDE system tries to bridge the gap between
engineers and designers by offering them an easy and
effective way to access shared information sources
without the need of adapting to a special terminology
that may not be natural for them. The system handles
different terminologies and aims at answering queries
semantically accurate in a way the user is familiar with.
To interpret and further process such queries
Semantic Web technologies are used within WIDE in
order to bring together the needs of the different user
groups. The search for information is supported by meta
data, semantically annotated content and ontologies as to

Figure 1. WIDE architecture

In Figure 1 are four main components. Three of
these components are laid down in blue color and labeled
with iconic elements: the user interface (UI) which
presents results and their semantic dependencies mainly
using visualization techniques; the meta level (ML)
which performs semantic processing like interchange of
synonyms, interpretation of semantic relations and
keyword matching; the agency which maps the business
logic of the whole application using user-group
dependent agents to adapt to profiles of predefined usergroups. The content level as fourth component is
illustrated in a somewhat detailed manner to show the
different sources of information WIDE is able to
integrate: internal databases with SQL-access, external
databases like ASAM-ODS based sources and intra- or

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Internet with http-access. The whole system is based on a
communication protocol of the interconnected
components encoded in the resource description
framework language RDF. Queries to the content level
are encoded in the corresponding Resource Querying
Language RQL. The task of the content level is to
translate the system-internal RQL statements to query
languages understandable by the common data sources.

2. Semantic tagging
There exist several approaches to define
“semantics”. The first is to define internal relations of a
network of concepts. The attributes describing the
relations are twofold: On the one hand they can
constitute a class of concepts, which comprise several
common attributes. On the other hand they can mark up
differences between concepts to discriminate them. The
kind of attributes has to be described by the relations
between two or more concepts instead of describing
them stand-alone. To describe them stand-alone would
be possible only by some references to external objects.

reality. This definition of semantics suites well for
concepts describing something external to the current
situation of communication between two persons. The
symbols (words) are labels for data or information about
the environment of the thinking entities – i.e. humans.
The intensional and extensional approach are
complementary to each other. We recognize that the
intensional approach is widely used in Information
Technology. This means that given concepts and their
relations in speech are formalized by the semantic
tagging in ontologies. Hereby the main concern is to
install a communication with the computer, which is
understandable by humans and is not restricted by
preconditions based on technological boundaries.
In WIDE we use a three-level approach to enrich
given data or basic entities to access them in a semantic
way. This construction is called Information Source. We
rely on RDF and RDFS to define the access ways to the
content of the system.
Figure 2 is a sketch of such an Information Source.
The basic layer of an Information Source is the content
itself as it is stored in databases or the World Wide Web.

Figure 2. Semantic tagging

This kind of definition of semantics leak by the
ontological anchor in realism. It is well suitable for
analyzing the communicative aspects of semantics. If
two people are communicating and, as a result some
misunderstanding arises they can analyze them by
relying on the network of concepts without the need of
hinting at real objects.
If the objective is to rely on real objects as semantic
carriers of concepts an extensional definition has to be
used. The extensional definition does not work anymore
speech-internal but refers to speech-external sections of

The second layer is a system internal description of this
content in terms of RDF. An example of such a network
of terms is shown on the left side of the figure. The
objective here is to get independent from the different
notations and storage formats of the proprietary
databases or other data sources.
The third layer of an Information Source bases on
RDF(S), where S denotes the schema level of RDF. We
use this level to define common schemata. This level
could be seen as the semantic closure of an Information
Source.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

This third level of indirection is necessary to
introduce object-oriented techniques as information
hiding and inheritance in the application of semantic
tagging. The benefit of object-orientation is the
possibility to bring in a formal description of the
concepts used in the meta level.
WIDE avoids the definition of specialized protocols
for communication with the help of semantic web
technologies. It releases the definition of several
semantics for several information exchange protocols by
mapping different terminologies to a foundational
schema.

3. User involvement
The basic scenario of WIDE is that two different
user groups have two different terms for nearly the same
concept but expect to get different results. For instance a
“vehicle” can be denoted as “automobile” or as “car”. So
WIDE has to map a number of synonyms to one core
aspect of these concepts. But otherwise if a stylist wants
to know something about “vehicles” he expects some
sketches as a result whereas an engineer is interested in
technical specifications. Therefore WIDE has to map
first synonyms to core concepts and thereafter core
concepts to user profiles.

user’s queries have to be translated into the right system
commands. The requirements to the agency are therefore
twofold: With help of the meta level the user query has
to be semantically interpreted to make it fit the content
level instances of the schemata.
Information retrieval is determined by a compromise
of two parameters concerning selectivity:
• Recall: What percentage of relevant documents
are retrieved.
• Precision: What percentage of retrieved
documents are relevant.
In WIDE the quality of information retrieval is userdepending: some users (engineers) like high precision
whereas other users (designers) like a high rate of recall.
An engineer is interested in exact and selective results
whereas a designer want to get helpful suggestions. So
different user profiles require different functionalities.
Therefore the agency has to guess the right functionality
for retrieval of content of several sources.
As the system does not have a formal definition for
the semantic distance between two phrases, measuring
user queries to get discrete values for distinction is not
possible. The user model and the corresponding semantic
model implemented in WIDE depend on heuristic values.
They are difficult to maintain and to adapt to new
semantic aspects that humans are able to utter according

Figure 3. Visualisation of semantic dependencies

The agency is the mediator among users, semantic
processors and content. In WIDE no user has to learn the
system terminology. It is the system that adopts the
user’s terminology. To make the system run this way the

to each new situation.
The functionality of WIDE is based on two
preconditions that are “state of the art” in this field. The
first precondition is the relative homogeneity of the user

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

groups. Even if designer and engineers have different
mentalities, they are intra specific equal. Moreover, they
do not differ in their cognitive knowledge processing as
much as for example deaf people do from hearing ones.
The second precondition is the equality of the
working situation. Both user groups are involved in the
same processes of information retrieval, because they
both have to work according to the same subject. So
WIDE is able to summarize different stages in the same
chain of working processes: design and engineering. It
relies on the problem of integration of data formats
according different communication and information
retrieval needs, but depending on well defined situations
and visualization formats.
WIDE then implements the user involvement by
using the intensional approach defining the semantic of
the terminology of each user group.
WIDE visualizes semantic results using a common
understandable format of visualizing networks. In Figure
3 a screenshot of the user interface of WIDE is shown.
The left row contains two elements that are the query
input and refinement interface and below it a possibility
to recall predefined search sessions. The right row
contains a visualization of the semantic dependencies of
the search result to the dark red marked user query in the
centre of the screen section. The light red marked boxes
in the network are concepts with documents attached
whereas the white boxes are empty but semantic valuable
concepts, for example to be used as root to other leafs.
The links to the documents hidden behind the light
red marked boxes are shown as URL in the section
below the semantic network. If the user clicks one of the
links an application launcher is called to pop up the
document according its mime-type. In Figure 3 a picture
of a car and a document containing technical
specifications are shown as examples.

description of the content and the extensional hint to
reality.
This means that there is no relation between the
document and the real entity except for the intensional
relationship modeled by ontologies. The user profile is
separated from the semantic remodeling of the reality but
the user itself has the central role to bring together the
intensional and extensional part of the model. Because
there are two different tools to describe aspects of one
and the same situation (user profile and ontology) it is
hard to maintain and administer the content used for the
involvement of the user.

4. Broadening the approach
We state in the previous section that the intensional
approach is incomplete. It is not semantically closed,
what means that the extensional part of meaning is
omitted. In WIDE the documents described by the meta
data looks like the extensional part of the ontologies used
by the agency to bridge the gap between the users
terminology and the content levels description of the
content searched for. But from the user’s point of view
the documents are intensional in terms of internal
information of the working groups about external entities
like cars, engines, animals and so on.
Figure 4 sketches this situation. The user treats the
documents visualized by the computer like intensional
given information that is as if other people are speaking
to him. The computer is mediator between several users
and the user himself is mediator between the intensional

Figure 4. Semantic relations

4.1. A third definition of semantic
A third definition of “semantic” relies on the use of
concepts and the roles of the speaker in the
communication situation. This definition includes the
former ones, because the extensional view can be seen as
denotative use of a concept and the intensional view can
be seen as connotative use of a concept.
Relying on these definition Figure 4 can be redrawn
in the following way (Figure 5). The user is involved in a
semantic network of denotative and connotative usages
of concepts and the computer should be able to support
both kinds of these usages. The separation between user
profile and ontology is not necessary any more.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

The advantage of relying on this definition of
semantic is the possibility to model situation depending
information in tight connection to users and content. This
concept of semantic can be extended furthermore to the
concept of semantic roles for basic semantic units of a
sentence. [3]

Figure 5. Semantic usage

If we speak of semantic in sense of usage or
semantic roles for the carriers of meaning we can extend
the adaptability of semantically annotated systems. The
author wants to refer to his explanations of the
distinction between data, information and knowledge in
[1]. Whereas data are the basic units of content,
information and knowledge are more complex and
situation dependent.
The intensional and extensional approach of
semantics model static aspects of content like inheritance
and hierarchism of the networked concepts. Like the
object-oriented view in modeling software structures
these approach leaves a lack in modeling dynamic
aspects of the semantic system. Information transfer and
processing is a very dynamic process and the modeling
of semantics has to adapt to this dynamic. The objective
here is to get a better user involvement instead of
dividing semantic into an ontological part and a
functional part processed by not semantically based
subcomponents of the system.

5. Semantic as usage of information carriers
If we make the processes of the system semantic
instead of building static conceptual ontologies it is
possible to extend semantics to wider fields of semantic
carriers as only words.
The concept of semantic carriers is derived from the
concept of information carriers in the field of eLearning.
The basic issue of pedagogic is to include the choice of
the media of learning in the whole concept of knowledge
transfer. Therefore in eLearning the content, which have
to be provided is separated from the form of providing it.
Moreover pedagogic tries to model the whole situation of
knowledge transfer that is the environment of learning.
Within this concept we are not forced to rely on
words as only possibility of knowledge transfer. Even
visual media can be included in the process of illustrating
some content. That is, deaf user or other minorities of the
community of handicapped people can benefit from a
visualization of information. On the other hand
information visualization is then able to add its impact to
the issue of barrier free technology.
In Figure 6 this extension is mapped to a generic
framework of expertise based systems as they are applied
in eLearning environments.
It concerns a 3-layers architecture, where only the
modules „Adaptive user interface“ and „Graphical
expertise carrier“ represent the graphical user interface.
The "Human Domain" does not belong to the computer
system, but is a model-confined representation of the
human acquisition of knowledge.
The 3-layers architecture is suitable for the
uncoupling of a system internal knowledge
representation and their visualization with help of a
composition of graphical basic elements. This means,
that the semantic processes can be mapped to the
business logic of this common known architecture and
the semantic annotation to the data representation layer.
The semantic processes can take into account some
information exchange with system-external components.
The interaction component is not only one-directed as
the data flow arrows indicate. The more complex the
expertise to be integrated is, the more feedback the
system should give to the user in this stage of expertise
integration.
The expertise description is the core problem of this
sketchy introduction into the field of the semantic of
information visualization and will be subject of further
research. It may be frame-based, as it is currently
attempted in FrameNet [4]. But this is not the crucial
point. The crucial point is that semantic assignment of
information visualization goes far beyond the actual
given methods of semantic annotation. Providing the
whole picture it extends also the given attempts in
accessibility theory.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 6. The big picture

The system internal transformation of the expertise
description concerns the integration of suitable selected
sub ranges of the expertise (Expertise Selection) in
visualization understandable by humans. The task is to
map semantic roles with their situation dependent usage
to proper metaphors. As explained in [1] the sign
language of deaf people may be a rich field to extract
such metaphors, because gestures encode not only
intensional aspects of information but are situation
dependent visualizations of content.
One attempt to be proposed is to rely on given
linguistic research concerning the decomposition of sign
language in basic semantic units. This is already done by
developing the notification language HamNoSys, which
describes the elementary information carriers of gestures
by a word independent codification. Basic information
carriers of gestures are for example the positioning of
hands in front of the body or the angle of the hand
relative to the arm, which executes the gesture [5].
This notification is not self-explaining. Therefore it
has to be mapped to more common used icons and
metaphors. But it is a far developed and good evaluated
method of denoting content independent from usual used
words.
This way information visualization is able to make
qualitative
statements
instead
of
quantitative
visualizations as the author stated in his presentation of
[1] at the IV03.

Acknowledgement
The author wants to thank the WIDE consortium for
the possibility to introduce some basic ideas concerning
a semantic of information visualization.
He also wants to thank Dr. Lindner at the GRIS
department of the Technical University of Darmstadt for
his kindly providing of Figure 6. The big picture.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Dirk Burmeister. Requirements of Deaf User of
Information Visualization - An Interdisciplinary
Approach. In Proceedings Seventh International
Conference on Information Visualization IV 2003. IEEE,
433-438. July 2003
Brigitte Koch, Uwe Jasnoch, André Stork. WIDE Semantic Web for Design and Engineering. In
Proceedings International Conference on Information
Systems and Engineering ISE 2002. 23-28. San Diego
2002
Charles J. Fillmore. The case for case. In Universals in
Linguistic Theory. 1-88. New York 1968
http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/framenet/
Becker, C., „Zur Struktur der deutschen
Gebärdensprache”, WVT Wissenschaftlicher Verlag
Trier, 1997

