Facilitating Understanding of Information Visualizations: Emerging
Principles and Examples
Ben Shneiderman
Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA
ben@cs.umd.edu
The enthusiasm for information visualization has generated a wide variety of interesting tools for multi-dimensional,
hierarchical, and other kinds of visualizations. However, some designs are readily accepted as understandable and
useful, while others are perceived as confusing and useless. Controlled studies have begun to sort of some of the
issues, but the insights of designers and usability tests are contributing interesting cognitive hypotheses for
researchers and practical guidelines for developers. This talk will offer examples of what works and what doesn't
with a preliminary set of principles that might have wide applicability.
BEN SHNEIDERMAN is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science Founding Director (1983-2000) of
the Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory (http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/), and Member of the Institutes for
Advanced Computer Studies & for Systems Research, all at the University of Maryland at College Park. He was
elected as a Fellow of the Association for Computing (ACM) in 1997 and a Fellow of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in 2001. He received the ACM SIGCHI Lifetime Achievement Award in
2001. Ben Shneiderman is the author of Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer
Interaction (4th edition, April 2004) http://www.aw.com/DTUI/. His move into information visualization helped
spawn the successful company Spotfire http://www.spotfire.com/. He was an advisor for www.smartmoney.com
where his treemap idea was the basis for the marketmap. He is currently an advisor for ILOG (
http://www.ilog.com) and the HiveGroup (http://www.hivegroup.com). With S. Card and J. Mackinlay, he coauthored Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think (1999). Leonardo's Laptop: Human Needs
and the New Computing Technologies appeared in October 2002, and his new book with B. Bederson, The Craft of
Information Visualization: Readings and Reflections, was published in April 2003.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

