DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2009.01708.x
Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2010
G. Melançon, T. Munzner, and D. Weiskopf
(Guest Editors)

Volume 29 (2010), Number 3

An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge
Management
Xiaoyu Wang 1 ,Wenwen Dou1 , Shen-En Chen2 , William Ribarsky1 and Remco Chang1
1 Charlotte

Visualization Center, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
of Civil Engineer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA

2 Department

Abstract
Bridges deteriorate over their life cycles and require continuous maintenance to ensure their structural integrity,
and in turn, the safety of the public. Maintaining bridges is a multi-faceted operation that requires both domain
knowledge and analytics techniques over large data sources. Although most existing bridge management systems
(BMS) are very efficient at data storage, they are not as effective at providing analytical capabilities or as flexible
at supporting different inspection technologies. In this paper, we present a visual analytics system that extends the
capability of current BMSs. Based on a nation-wide survey and our interviews with bridge managers, we designed
our system to be customizable so that it can provide interactive exploration, information correlation, and domainoriented data analysis. When tested by bridge managers of the U.S. Department of Transportation, we validated
that our system provides bridge managers with the necessary features for performing in-depth analysis of bridges
from a variety of perspectives that are in accordance to their typical workflow.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
Generation—Line and curve generation

1. Introduction

Since 1968, the U.S. Department Of Transportation (USDOT) has committed to monitoring and maintaining all
bridges across the states. Currently, bridge inspections are
typically completed over a 2-year cycle. According to the
federal inspection coding guidance [Wes04], these inspections focus on assessing bridges from both structural and external factors, including physical structure conditions, traffic
volume and patterns, surrounding environments, etc. At the
end of a typical bridge inspection, over one hundred data
items are often recorded and stored in a bridge management
system (BMS) [Hea07]. This collected data subsequently
serves as input to most bridge managers’ maintenance planning processes.

Bridges are an important component of the U.S. transportation system, and maintaining their structural integrity is crucial to the safety of millions of people. However, bridges deteriorate over the course of their designed life cycles. The
steel corrodes, the concrete spalls, and the stone cracks.
Without proper maintenance, these deteriorations may cause
severe damages that might lead to potential catastrophes.
In theory, bridge engineers can predict the service life of
bridges based on computing each bridge’s deterioration rate
and establish a suitable maintenance plan [DET06]. However, since the presumed service conditions of a bridge may
change, the bridge’s deterioration rate often varies from its
theoretical expectations. In practice, it has been observed
that deterioration rates of similar bridges can vary significantly due to their local weather environments, traffic patterns, etc. [DET06]. Therefore, to ensure the integrity of a
bridge and to prevent severe deteriorations, it is very important to establish regular inspections and to provide necessary
bridge maintenances [Bri93] [MRG∗ 01].
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image

Given the importance of bridges, one would hope that
most bridges are maintained in a timely manner. However,
according to the 2009 American Society of Civil Engineers report, currently more than 26 percent of the nation’s
599,766 bridges are either structurally deficient or functionally obsolete [Ame09]. Furthermore, given the limited budget and other resources, not all of the bridges can be main-

1033

1034

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

Figure 1: This is the overview of the entire system, including views for Microsoft Virtual Earth(center), Parallel Coordinates
(top corners), Scatter Plots (middle left), Temporal Analysis (third row right), and the original data (bottom row). Per-Bridge
Detail View(middle right). Several items are highlighted with colors.

tained immediately. In order to utilize the limited budget
and resource effectively, most bridge managers develop their
own strategies to prioritize and determine the order in which
bridges should be maintained.

of having a management system that enables them to be
more effective at analyzing their bridges, and the system
needs to be customizable for assisting their individual workflows.

While these strategies have largely balanced the limited
resources with the upkeep of bridges across the country, the
collapse of the I-35 bridge in Minneapolis during August
2007 serves as a devastating reminder that the complexity of bridge management still demands novel techniques
and proper tools to interpret and understand bridge data.
Therefore, soon after the tragedy, members of our university
formed a research partnership with the USDOT, the North
Carolina State Department of Transportation (NCDOT), and
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) to investigate novel approaches in
assisting the bridge management process.

Based on their feedback, we identified three types of
bridge analyses that are often essential in bridge manager’s
decision-making process, namely, structural analysis, temporal analysis and geospatial analysis. While the use of these
three analysis processes and their usage patterns may vary in
each bridge manager’s workflow, we have found these analysis steps to be necessary for bridge managers to analyze the
bridge data, understand the severity of deteriorations, and to
make further maintenance decisions.

One of our first actions under this research partnership
was to conduct a nation-wide survey [CRR09] to understand
the usage of current BMSs and to identify potential areas
of improvement. 35 out of 50 state DOTs responded to our
survey, and the result indicates that the current bridge management systems are often insufficient in supporting bridge
analysis. Almost all the responded states expressed the need

Using these three analysis processes as foundation, we designed and developed an interactive, exploratory visual analytics system for analyzing bridge data. Our system encodes
the three processes as a group of four coordinated visualizations and allows the bridge manager to choose different
combinations of visualizations and to customize them to fit
into their own analysis workflow. To evaluate the system,
we conducted expert evaluations with bridge managers from
NCDOT and found that most managers believed our system
to be useful and complimentary to their existing analysis
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

processes. We further identified ways in which our system
could be quickly incorporated into their daily routines.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 characterizes the analysis processes of domain experts
and describes our system’s targeted users. Section 3 provides
more detail about the limitations of current BMSs. Section
4 presents our visual analytics system. Section 5 provides
several scenarios in which our system can facilitate bridge
management. In Section 6, we present our evaluation with
domain experts and our discussion for advancing from current stage, and we conclude our paper in Section 7.

1035

of BMS in each state, and asked for feedback on the utilities
of those systems. As listed in the following table, our survey
was centered around these three substantive questions:
1
2
3

What do you see as the most important next step in the
further development of your agency’s BMS ?
What do you see as the necessity of expanding current
BMSs?
What are the biggest barriers in your department in implementing innovations that may strengthen your BMS?

Table 1: The three substantive questions for all the state
DOTs in the U.S.

2. Domain Characterization
Bridge maintenance workflow is a process of deciding
the severity, trending, relevance, and benefits of maintenance work on a specific bridge as well as a network of
bridges. According to AASHTO’s asset management guidelines [AAS03], the first step in this process is to gather relevant data about a particular bridge, including its known damages, previous maintenance histories, and typical deterioration patterns. Bridge managers will then start analyzing the
obtained information, identifying the needs for maintenance
and coming up with proper maintenance plans.
According to bridge managers from NCDOT, it is fairly
common for a bridge manager to be responsible for hundreds of bridges. Since federal guideline dictates that bridges
are inspected on a biennial basis, approximately 50% of the
bridges are inspected in a given year. However, in that same
year, only a portion of the bridges, approximately 20% 25%, would require any maintenance attention. Even fewer
bridges (around 10%) may actually receive maintenance
work. Given the complexity of these inspection results, compounded with external constraints on budget and resources, a
bridge manager needs to have complete understanding of all
bridges under his/her jurisdiction when making maintenance
decisions.
It is therefore necessary to have a BMS that monitors and
analyzes the conditions of bridges in a way that allows a
bridge manager to maintain an overview of all bridges and
yet retain the capability to inspect detailed information of a
particular bridge. Currently, there are a few available BMSs
such as Pontis [WR03] and BRIDGIT [HS98] that promise
analytical capabilities. However, there exist many limitations and issues with these BMSs (some of which will be
described in detail in the following section), many bridge
managers, including a few from NCDOT, still rely on using
simple spreadsheets such as Microsoft Excel to perform their
analyses.

Of the 50 state DOTs that we contacted, 35 of them responded. For each state, we contacted multiple bridge managers and collected questionnaires from them individually.
We received a total of 71 questionnaires from these states.
The result of the survey indicates that while the BMSs used
at these state DOTs are very efficient at data storage, they
are not as effective in providing data exploration or domainspecific data analysis. Based on the response of these state
DOTs, we categorize the limitations of existing BMSs into
three major areas:
• BMSs have not provided effective support for bridge
managers’ decision-making processes. Many states
have reported that they mainly utilize BMSs as data storage software. Although some BMSs have certain automatic decision making support capability [WR03], their
analysis tools are not appropriate or adequate to be incorporated in to a bridge manager’s analysis process.
• BMSs are rigid in structure and cannot be easily
adapted to support individual bridge manager’s task
routines. Many states have reported that it is difficult for
them to customize BMSs to suite their own analytical approaches. These states have also indicated that it is very
difficult for them to implement additional features within
these BMSs.
• BMSs have not provided abilities to incorporate local
inspection technologies. Many states have their own inspections results that are complementary to the national
standard inspections. However, as reported by state DOTs,
it is often difficult to import such information into the data
structure that these BMSs provide.
In summary, almost all state DOTs have expressed the
need of having a BMS that enables them to be more effective
at analyzing their bridges. Additionally, they have helped us
identify their domain problems and encouraged us to design
a system that can assist their decision-making processes.
4. Characterizing the Domain Problems

3. Identifying the Limits in Current BMSs
Together with USDOT, we conducted a nation-wide survey
to analyze the current usage of BMSs [CRR09]. Our survey focused on collecting information about the utilization
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

As indicated by the result of the survey, there are three challenges in existing BMSs: the insufficient support for analytical processes, the restrictions in personalizing analysis routines, and the difficulties in integrating heterogenous data.

1036

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

Therefore, the primary goal of our system is to address these
challenges in accordance to the needs of the bridge managers at these state DOTs. The detailed characterization of
these three challenges, as well as how they are addressed in
our system are described in the following sections.

4.1. Providing effective support for bridge manager’s
decision-making processes
As the state DOTs noted, current BMSs are effective at storing data, but are insufficient at supporting analysis processes.
In order to address this shortcoming and to provide support
for bridge analysis, we worked with bridge managers at NCDOT to identify three analyses that are often essential to
their decision-making process: structural analysis, temporal
analysis, and geospatial analysis. According to these bridge
managers, these analyses help them analyze bridge data from
different perspectives and are integral to their daily workflows.
• Dynamic Geospatial Analysis: Bridges exist in a dynamic environment with changing surroundings. Therefore, rather than using a static map, bridge managers often need to adapt to new situations and analyze bridges
with additional information such as traffic patterns, flooding regions, and population densities. According to bridge
managers, supporting dynamic geo-exploration is a primary area for bridge analysis.
• High Dimensional Structural Analysis: Typically, the
data representing bridge structures are high in dimensionality. Federal regulation requires bridge inspection to
record nearly 130 structural variables biennially. Given
the complexity of the data, a tool that could assist bridge
managers’ comprehension of these variables would be essential. Specifically, on a high level, bridge managers need
to detect and identify causal relationships and trends in
these variables so that they could identify phenomena that
are affecting all bridges. On a detailed level when inspecting a single bridge, bridge managers need to examine the
overall structure integrity of a bridge across multiple variables and to focus on particular structural components inside that bridge.
• Scalable Temporal Analysis: Through analyzing the
temporal changes of a bridge’s condition, bridge managers can compute the deterioration rate of the bridge.
In addition, bridge managers can adjust the future maintenance plans by assessing the outcomes from previous
work. Therefore, the ability to capture the temporal information is of great value to bridge managers when planning for future maintenances. However, temporal analysis in most existing BMSs is limited to analysis on a
per bridge basis. Having an overview that could help the
bridge managers spot bridges with abnormal temporal behaviors would be very beneficial.

4.2. Supporting Individual Manager’s Task Routine
Our survey also suggested that current BMS are quite rigid
in supporting individual bridge manager’s task routines.
As noted in Section 2 bridge managers often need to develop their own analysis routines. Depending on available
resources, a bridge manager’s strategy can be very different
from his/her peers’, and would require a different combination of the above analysis processes. In addition, sometimes
even the same manager needs to take alternative analytical
approaches due to changes in priorities. At the heart of these
individual routines are the different combinations and sequences of the above analytical processes. Therefore, it is
rather important for a system to provide bridge managers
with the flexibility to combine and sequence these analytical
processes to fit their own workflows.
4.3. Supporting Integration of Local Inspection
Technologies
While this is an important issue for the bridge managers,
solving it begins with designing new data structures for the
BMS. Currently, given the rigid nature of existing BMSs,
supporting data integration would require an overhaul of the
designs of these BMSs. We have begun discussions with
AASHTO to improve the capabilities of BMSs in providing such integrations, but it is outside of the scope of this
project.
5. The Visual Analytics System
Based on the requests of state DOTs as described above,
we design an interactive visual analytics system (Figure 1)
that supports a bridge manager’s decision-making process
and remains customizable to fit an individual manager’s task
routine. The design of our system is based on coordinated
multiple views (CMV) [Rob07], as well as a modular software architecture that supports customization of the system
depending on the bridge manager’s preference.
5.1. Supporting Decision-Making Process through
Multiple Coordinated Visualization
In order to provide bridge managers with analytical capability, our system encodes the three analyses processes described in the previous section into a set of coordinated visualizations. In the following sections, we describe how each
process is depicted in our system.
5.1.1. High Dimensional Structural Analysis
Our system includes three views for helping bridge managers to analyze bridge structures on both a high-level
overview and a low-level detail view. On the high level, our
system utilizes both a parallel coordinate view (PCView, see
Figure 1 (A)) [Mol05] and a scatter plot view (SPView see
Figure 1 (B)) [Tuf90] to help bridge managers detect and
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

identify causal relationships and trends in the data variables.
The nature of parallel coordinates limits the number of dimensions that can be effectively displayed at a time. Our
implementation therefore provides control panels to allow
the user to select the dimensions of interest (Figure 1 (D)).
These dimensions are determined by individual expertise
and bridge managers’ areas of focus. For example, a structural engineer is more likely to examine bridges based on
the structural related dimensions, whereas a planner would
focus on analyzing dimensions that represent balances between costs and potential bridge improvements. Using this
view, bridge managers can therefore find correlations in specific sets of the bridge’s attributes.
On the other hand, the SP view is designed to depict relationships between bridges across two specific dimensions.
The spatial layout of the view allows the user to see clusters and clearly identify outliers, and is a slightly more intuitive interface than the potentially complex PC view. In
addition, given the importance of time in bridge analysis,
our system also extends the ability to see temporal changes
in both views, which in turn allows bridge managers to interactively explore and compare information from different
inspection cycle. For example, Figure 1 (B1) suggests the
sufficiency rating distribution in year 2004, while Figure 1
(B2) shows the distribution of same group of bridges in year
2006. Together, these two visualizations give bridge managers the ability to see high-level trends and patterns in the
data’s variables.

Figure 2: The Detail View for Bridge (A) An interactive
Bridge Schematic Diagram; (B) A Line graph for monitoring temporal changes for major bridge structures; (C) Image
Analysis Results for cracks on pavements; (D) Inspection
Imageries that suggests the structural damage of the supporting piles of this bridge.

On a detailed level, when inspecting a single bridge,
bridge managers need to examine both the overall structural integrity of a bridge across multiple variables, as well
as focusing on particular structural components inside that
bridge. Therefore, we design a structural detail view to automatically link information between each bridge component
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1037

and provide bridge managers with an intuitive visualization
to interactively analyze the corresponding structural information.
Based on existing bridge design guidelines [DET06], we
model general bridge components into an interactive bridge
schematic diagram (see Figure 2 (A)). In this diagram,
bridge managers can directly select the major bridge structures, and analyze each component individually. In addition, a line graph enables bridge managers to monitor temporal changes for individual bridge structures. Associated
with overall temporal information presented in the small
multiples view, this structural temporal component helps
bridge managers to gain insight into the effects of structural changes, and to efficiently identify the key factors in
the overall deteriorations.
5.1.2. Small Multiples for Temporal Analysis
Bridge managers have expressed the need of having a tool
to help them analyze the temporal changes of bridge data.
They want to be able to perform analysis over time on a large
number of bridges as well as one bridge at a time. Thus, we
design a small multiples view [Tuf90] to help them achieve
temporal analysis of large number of bridges. Our design is
based on small multiples views in the literature [KERC09],
and it shows deterioration changes of each bridge using trend
lines.

Figure 3: The Small Multiples view with Squarified Treemap
layout. Bridges are grouped by their main structure types.
For each cell, the x axis represents different inspection cycles and the y axis represents the structural attribute values
selected by the user.

As shown in Figure 3, each cell in this view represents
a single bridge, while the inside line graph represents the
bridge’s overall rating in all inspection cycles. These cells
are further sorted based on the standard deviations of the y
axes in the line graph to determine the color of the cells,
with warmer color representing sharper changes over time.
We note that in this approach, bridges with either downward
and upward trending in structural attributes will be colored

1038

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

with warmer colors. Although it is not often that bridge managers need to review more than three inspection cycles (6
years), our small multiple views can still efficiently represent all the inspection cycles by changing the line graph to a
trail enabled bubble chart, which is similar with the work by
Robertson et al [RFF∗ 08]. We also provide bridge inspectors
a control panel to modify the mathematical functions used in
highlighting the cells.

5.2. Supporting Customization of the System

Additionally, since it is often necessary for bridge managers to understand the temporal patterns for a certain group
of bridges, we applied a customizable Treemap [BHW00]
spatial layout to group the small multiples based on particular structures. There were two main design considerations on utilizing this layout. On one hand, we consider
Treemap layout for its inherent advantage in displaying large
scale of data, as demonstrated by Bederson et al. [BSW02].
Since bridge managers normally need to monitor hundreds
of bridges together, this salability is useful for them to effectively compare difference bridges and see overall trends.

Therefore, each visualization component integrated in our
current system is designed to be interchangeable with other
equivalent visualizations if they both use the bridge identification numbers. Using our architecture, if bridge managers
suggest new suitable visualizations for their analysis, our
system would be ready to incorporate those visualizations
to provide additional functionalities.

On the other hand, we utilize the Treemap layout to indicate the size and groupings of different bridges. For example,
Figure 3 shows the bridges divided based on their construction material (note the black lines separating regions of the
treemap). In this example, the layout enables bridge managers to discover the uncommon temporal pattern where several recently built, known-to-last, concrete structure bridges
show significant deterioration. It is therefore mentioned by
bridge managers that the capability in finding such insight is
not only valuable for their maintenance decisions, but also
can help optimize their future construction planning.

To adapt to the development of emerging domain technologies, our system is built on top of a modular architecture
that allows bridge managers to extend the system to incorporate advanced visualizations and more effective data models. This is made possible largely because inspections and
analysis results are tightly associated using a unique bridge
identification number.

Furthermore, this approach enables bridge managers to
combine the traditional National Bridge Inspection Standards (NBIS) dataset with their locally collected information. As of the paper, we have helped NCDOT bridge managers to associate bridge structural information with extensive data collected in the North Carolina region. This extensive information includes, as shown in Figure 1 (F), field inspections imageries, Light Detection And Ranging (LIDAR)
scans for each structure, and pavement crack analysis results.
6. Example Scenario

While there is still much to be improved for the small multiple view, bridge managers have already seen usefulness in
utilizing it to analyze temporal trends and patterns among
the bridges.

5.1.3. Geospatial Analysis
Extensive research on geospatial visualization [WDSC07,
Fis07] have shown the benefits of utilizing online map systems such as Google Maps and Microsoft Virtual Earth. We
utilize Microsoft Virtual Earth (MSVE [Mic09]) to provide
bridge managers with dynamic and interactive geospatial
analysis (see Figure 1 (C)). By placing the bridges onto the
scalable map, detailed geographic relationships and patterns
immediately become apparent.

Figure 4: (A) A significant downward temporal trending
indicates an unusual pattern (B) Using PCView to compare different structural attributes (C) Examining a certain
bridge on SPView, indicating this is the earliest constructed
bridge in the database (D) The Geospatial view shows that
this bridge is constructed on top of a river stream.

By adopting online map systems such as MSVE, our system can have the most up-to-date geospatial information
such as road structures and 3D building models. However,
we further extended MSVE in our system to overlay large
amounts of (proprietary) geo-coordinated information over
the map, such as traffic distribution patterns and satellite images, and can utilize that information to perform extensive
geospatial analysis.

Identifying and understanding the cause of bridge deterioration is a key step for bridge managers to come up with
corresponding maintenance strategies. Based on our discussions with 9 bridge managers and bridge experts, it has been
observed that there are generally three stages in achieving
this step, namely, selecting bridge candidates, detailed examination, and identifying potential causes for damage. The
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

following scenario was identified together with 5 bridge engineers (4 males and 1 female) from Charlotte DOT’s bridge
management team for their annual bridge maintenance planning. During this process, these engineers were encouraged
to collaboratively discuss the issues in a think aloud manner.
As observers, we documented their process and help them to
familiarize with the system. We also provided explanations
about certain features in our system along their discovery.
Our system was initialized with data from previous
three inspection cycles: years 2000, 2004, and 2006. The
bridge management team started the maintenance process
by searching for bridges with significant changes in sufficiency rating in the previous years. They utilized the small
multiples view to see if any interesting bridge changing patterns could be identified. As shown in Figure 1 (E), the team
found a set of bridges with warmer colors in the small multiples view, and they also identified several bridges with significant downward trends in the past years. By highlighting
these bridges in the scatter plot view (see Figure 4 (C)), the
team noticed that one of them was actually the oldest bridge
in the Charlotte area. Suggested by both the small multiple
view and the scatter plot view, this bridge actually shared the
lowest overall rating in that year and had had drastic deteriorations since 2004.
To have a closer look at the bridge, the team used our
geospatial view and zoomed into the bridge to check its
surrounding environments. As shown in Figure 4 (D), this
bridge was constructed over a river stream, and had supported high traffic volume because it had been chosen as
a part of a detour route for a major interstate highway.
These findings immediately raised several questions: could
the bridge’s deterioration be caused by water erosion, overloaded traffic, or flood damage? Although these were all possible causes of the deterioration, bridge managers had no
definitive answers to confirm these hypotheses by looking
at the geospatial view alone.
Trying to verify their hypotheses, the management team
started to find clues from the structural reports of that bridge.
By plotting the corresponding criteria in the parallel coordinate view, they found that the traffic amount on that
bridge had not changed significantly in the previous years,
and therefore ruled out the possibility of traffic pattern being the cause of the deterioration. However, the PC view
showed that the water adequacy rating had dropped significantly during the past two inspections, suggesting the bridge
had undergone severe water damage. To extract more detail,
the team brought up the bridge’s detailed structural view. As
shown in Figure 2 (D), the supporting pillar for this bridge
had shown heavy warping, and the bridge showed clear
marks of water erosion near the bottom of the pillar. A quick
reference check on the county’s flood history confirmed that
three significant flooding took place in years 2003, 2005, and
2006 around that area, which gave the bridge managers significant reasons to conclude that water damage, especially
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1039

flooding, was a key factor in causing the deterioration of this
bridge.
Given the poor condition of its supporting structure, the
bridge managers concluded that this bridge definitely needed
maintenance attention. After the exercise, the management
team commended the effectiveness of our system in assisting
the identification of the deficient bridge, as well as the cause
of the deterioration. Although simple, this scenario demonstrates a successful application of our tool in a real-world
analysis application.

7. Expert Evaluation
In this section, we report the feedback from evaluations conducted with bridge managers at both NCDOT and City of
Charlotte DOT (CDOT). A total number of 12 bridge managers (10 males and 2 females) participated in the three sessions of the onsite evaluations. Each of the sessions lasted
about two hours.
First, we conducted a training session (30 - 40 minutes). During this session, we demonstrated the design of
the system and the utilities of each visualization. Then, we
invited bridge managers to perform in-depth analyses using the system (45 - 60 minutes). We encouraged them to
carry out these analyses in a think aloud manner. We observed and documented the details about their analysis processes. Finally, we concluded the evaluation by a set of semistructured questionnaires, which includes bridge managers
feedbacks and comments about our system. Since bridge
managers may need time to familiarize themselves with the
all features provided by our visual analytics system, we also
conducted email followups to see if there were additional
comments they would like to share with us.
As of the current paper, we have kept communications
with bridge managers about their comments of the system in
the past 4 months and have gain significant insights for the
continuation of this project. Although the degree and depth
of analyses differed in each evaluation, the bridge managers
generally agreed that our system provided more analytical
capability than any existing BMSs, and that it is flexible
enough for them to quickly incorporate the use of our system
into their daily routine.

7.1. Visual Facilitation of Decision-making Processes
One benefit of our system that was noted by all bridge managers was that it provided a visual exploration environment
to help them analyze information from multiple aspects. The
capability of being able to perform not only geo-temporal
analysis, but also structural analysis was of great value to
bridge managers’ decision-making process. One of the managers commented that, “[the] linked visualizations provide
me with a cohesive understanding about the data that I am

1040

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

working on. It reduces the time I spent on manually searching for information, and helps me focus more on the task
itself.”
As demonstrated in the scenario (see Section 6), our system helped bridge managers to effectively analyze their data
across multiple dimensions and assist them in determining
the cause of deterioration. All the bridge managers found
the system practical, and believed that the system would be
valuable in their daily routines. One of the managers from
NCDOT noted that, “...using your system, I can see correlations that I normally wouldn’t be able to see. This is much
easier than making the similar observation from using our
current system.”
In particular, 7 out of the 12 bridges managers pointed out
that the temporal analysis in our system provided them with
the capability to effectively monitor changes in bridge conditions and identify maintenance candidates. Specifically, an
bridge manager from NCDOT commented on the temporal
view that, “[one] can quickly scan with the eyes to have a
sense of [the structural value changes of] a chunk of bridge”.
He further saw the value of applying this technique to volumes of bridges. “Again, if you get volumes of bridges, this
is a pretty nice feature to have.”; and he implied that this
view made it more straightforward to locate and select individual bridges with different temporal trends.
In addition, after familiarizing themselves with the concepts and usage of the PC View and SC View, most bridge
managers (9 out of 12) noted that the capability to examine bridge structures from multiple levels (overview and detailed view) could effectively guide them from examining
large amounts of data to inspecting bridges one at a time.
One of the bridge structural engineer commented on these
views that, ‘visually grasp numerical value on a more timely
manner and more manageablely done, makes it easier to
cross reference multiple bridge [structural] variables back
and forth”. Although three of the experts did not immediately saw the benefits of using the PC View, they later reported that,“with more time to play with your system, it appears to me that these views can be helpful to examine different bridges and understand their structural patterns”.
In summary, one bridge manager from USDOT commented that, “...using your system, we can now see what
we normally can’t see. We also could have a cohesive understanding about our bridge assets. This would be helpful
for us to identify and prioritize bridges...”. This confirms the
utilities of our system.
7.2. The Flexibility to Assist Individual Workflow
At the heart of our system is a modular software architecture. This design provides bridge managers with the flexibility to customize system, and allows them to only utilize the
necessary visualizations in their practices. As pointed out by
a manager from CDOT, “[your system] will greatly shorten

the catch-up time between my learning to use the system and
my actual use of it.”
Additionally, this modular design also allows our system
to keep up with the development of the bridge inspection
technologies. We are currently working with NCDOT to integrate their extensive inspection data into the system and
customize the system for their needs. According to a bridge
manager from USDOT, “true to the goal of the project, this
system allows us to think about how we could have more
practical impacts with integration of other technologies. As
such, it gives us an opportunity to deploy the system to other
state DOTs”.

8. Discussion
In this section, we discuss the current limitations of our system and future research directions.

8.1. Visualizations to Facilitate the Prioritization
Process
While data analysis using our system can assist bridge managers in identifying candidate bridges that are structurally
deficient, finding these bridges is just the first step in achieving overall maintenance decisions. There is an important prioritization process to decide which bridge actually receives
maintenance that takes place after the candidates have been
identified . As noted in section 2, this prioritization process
is necessary due to limited resources such as budget and construction timings. Due to such constraints, bridge managers
often need to find a balance between limited resources and
maintenance requirements to maximize the overall stability
of the transportation system as well as the safety of the public.
Unfortunately, such an optimization process is often not
well defined, and the maintenance decisions vary depending on the goal of individual bridge managers. For example,
some managers may focus on repairing supporting structures
of bridges, which they believe is crucial to the bridges’ structural integrity, while others may spend the resources on fixing the bridge deck where visible damages occur. Although
there are always uncertainties and variations in this process,
it is clear that bridge managers need to have adequate strategies and tools to help them find the most optimal solution.
Our current system mainly focuses on providing data
analysis, but not prioritization. According to bridge managers, it would be quite useful to extend our system’s ability
to support both stages and help them optimize maintenance
decisions. We have started discussing the possibility of extending our system with bridge managers, and the design of
a constraint-based interactive visual analytics system would
be one interesting future direction of our project.
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

8.2. Externalize the bridge manager’s domain
knowledge
Analysis of high-dimensional bridge data is generally performed by bridge managers who have a great deal of experience and special training, both of which are valuable domain
knowledge. It is therefore interesting to consider whether externalizing such domain knowledge and reapplying it into
customized visualizations would be feasible for enhancing
bridge maintenance decisions. Although there is no definitive way to achieve complete knowledge transfer, existing
research that has demonstrated how to incorporate visualization with domain specific knowledge [XGH06, GNRM08].
To achieve similar knowledge externalization, we propose
a tight integration of the visualization with an ontological knowledge structure that could interactively capture and
store the user’s interactions and translate them into domain
knowledge [WJD∗ 09]. This externalization could further be
used in training new managers, communicating with others,
and reporting decisions.
8.3. Combine Decision-making Model with Visual
Analytics System
Although our system has been very well received by DOTs
of all levels, there has been some discussions in using automated analysis tool versus explorative visual analytical
tool. In bridge management, existing BMSs, such as Pontis [RMSA02], include automated method like Markov models to predict the rate of bridge deterioration. While most
bridge managers have rejected such methods because of concerns with accuracy, some bridge managers have also raised
the question of how repeatable and reliable interactive visual
analytics system can be given the subjective nature of open
explorations.
We acknowledge that the support of explorations in visual
analytical systems is an important challenge for the entire
visualization community. However, in the context of bridge
management, we propose that the solution is likely an integration of interactive techniques with automated ones. The
challenge of such integration is the roles and relationships
between the two components. At this point we do not have
a clear outline on how to accomplish such integration that
would leverage the strengths of both methods, but this is an
important challenge that we will look to address in the near
future.
9. Related Work
US and state DOTs have had a long history of adopting
visualizations. As summarized in a recent survey by R.G.
Hughes [Hug08], transportation visualizations can be generally categorized into two groups: (1) 3D visualizations that
support design simulation and planning and (2) geographic
information visualization that helps with data analysis and
managing.
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1041

There is an extensive literature devoted to the use of visualization to support transportation simulation and planning.
For example, both VISSIM [Vis08] and CORSIM [Uni06]
are widely used to visualize traffic simulations and microscopic traffic controls. Also, 3D visualizations have been
adopted to depict transportation designs and maintenance
processes, such as NC3D [New09], a 3D visualization tool
for designing high-speed railroads.
The field of geospatial visualization is a well-established
area of research, especially in the field of Geographical Information Systems (GIS). Commercial GISs have also been
developed to specifically help depict transportation data,
such as GeoTrAMS [Int05], which is designed to manage
train and rail assets, and TransCAD [Cap09], which focuses
on road management. In visualization community, there are
also extensive research on geospatial analysis. In addition to
the systems we have referenced in Section 5, examples for
geospatial research also include GeoVista by Takatsuka et
al. [TG02] and GeoTime by Kapler et al. [KW04].
On the other hand, the use of visualization to perform
bridge data analysis and bridge management is still in a preliminary stage. Although some simulation-based highway
management systems have been developed [PTSR98], the
main focus in this line of research is on depicting and extending knowledge of the geospatial nature in transportation
information. Another notable analytical tool that partially includes bridge analysis is the work by Wongsuphssawat et
al. [WPF∗ 09] which performs data analysis of federal highway incidents. While both of these systems concentrate on
analyzing transportation information, our system focuses on
the interactive exploration and analysis of the relationships
within the bridge data.

10. Conclusion
Maintaining bridges is a multi-faceted operation that requires both domain knowledge and analytics techniques over
large data sources. Although current bridge management
systems are very efficient at data storage, they are not as effective at providing analytical capabilities. In this paper, we
present our interactive visual analytics system that extends
the capabilities of current BMSs. As shown in Figure 1,
our system was designed in collaboration with bridge managers in national, state, and local DOTs, and has been implemented specifically to provide them with interactive data
exploration, cohesive information correlation and domainoriented data analyses. Our system enables bridge managers to customize the visualization and data model to fit
each individual’s task routines. In our expert evaluations,
bridge managers expressed their interest in using our analysis system and confirmed its novelty and utility over existing
BMSs. With such encouraging feedbacks from domain experts, we are planning to deploy our system to multiple state
DOTs and put our system in to real-world environments.

1042

Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management

References
[AAS03] AASHTO: Transportation Asset Management Guide.
Tech. rep., NCHRP Project 20-24, January 2003. 3
[Ame09] A MERICAN S OCIETY OF C IVIL E NGINEERS: 2009 report card for america’s infrastructure on bridges, 2009. 1
[BHW00] B RULS M., H UIZING K., W IJK J. J. V.: Squarified
treemaps. In In Proceedings of the Joint Eurographics and IEEE
TCVG Symposium on Visualization (2000), Eindhoven University of Technology, Press, pp. 33–42. 6
[Bri93] B RINCKERHOFF PARSONS ; S ILANO L. G. (Ed.): Bridge
inspection and rehabilitation: a practical guide. John Wiley and
Sons, 1993. 1
[BSW02] B EDERSON B. B., S HNEIDERMAN B., WATTENBERG
M.: Ordered and quantum treemaps: Making effective use of 2d
space to display hierarchies. ACM Trans. Graph. 21, 4 (2002),
833–854. 6
[Cap09] C APLIPER C ORPORATION: TransCAD, a transportation
planning software. Tech. rep., Capliper Corporation, 2009. 9
[CRR09] C OREY R ICE X IAOYU WANG R. C., R IBARSKY W.: A
survey about the current usage of PONTIS across the U.S. Tech.
rep., Univeristy of North Carolina at Charlotte, 2009. 2, 3
[DET06] D EMETRIOS E. T ONIAS J. J. Z.: Bridge engineering.
McGraw Hill, 2006. 1, 5
[Fis07] F ISHER D.: Hotmap: Looking at geographic attention.
Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 13,
6 (Nov.-Dec. 2007), 1184–1191. 6
[GNRM08] G ARG S., NAM J., R AMAKRISHNAN I., M UELLER
K.: Model-driven visual analytics. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2008. VAST ’08. IEEE Symposium on (Oct.
2008), pp. 19–26. 9
[Hea07] H EARN G.: Bridge Inspection Practices. Tech. rep., University of Colorado, Boulder, 2007. 1
[HS98] H AWK H., S MALL E. P.: The bridgit bridge management
system. Structural Engineering International Volume 8 (1998),
309–314. 3
[Hug08] H UGHES R. G.: Research agenda for visualization
in transportation. In SIGGRAPH ’08: ACM SIGGRAPH 2008
classes (New York, NY, USA, 2008), ACM, pp. 1–5. 9
[Int05] I NTERGRAPH C ORPORATION: Geographisches Transport Anlagen Management System. Tech. rep., Intergraph Corporation, 2005. 9
[KERC09] K EEFE D., E WERT M., R IBARSKY W., C HANG R.:
Interactive coordinated multiple-view visualization of biomechanical motion data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 15, 6 (2009), 1383–1390. 5
[KW04] K APLER T., W RIGHT W.: Geotime information visualization. In INFOVIS ’04: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (Washington, DC, USA, 2004), IEEE
Computer Society, pp. 25–32. 9
[Mic09] M ICROSOFT C ORPORATION: Mircrosoft Virtual Earth.
Tech. rep., Microsoft Corporation, 2009. 6
[Mol05] M OLLER T.: A parallel coordinates style interface for
exploratory volume visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11, 1 (2005), 71–80. 4

[New09] N EWLANDS C OMPANY: NC3D, Transportation and
Urban Design System. Tech. rep., Newlands Company, 2009.
9
[PTSR98] P LAISANT C., TARNOFF P., S ARAF A., ROSE A.:
Understanding transportation management systems performance
with a simulation-based learning environment. Tech. rep., Proceedings of ITS’99, Annual Meeting of the Intelligent Transporation Society of America, 1998. 9
[RFF∗ 08] ROBERTSON G., F ERNANDEZ R., F ISHER D., L EE
B., S TASKO J.: Effectiveness of animation in trend visualization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14,
6 (2008), 1325–1332. 6
[RMSA02] ROBERT W. E., M ARSHALL A. R., S HEPARD R. W.,
A LDAYUZ J.: The pontis bridge management system: State-ofthe-practice in implementation and the pontis bridge management system: State-of-the-practice in implementation and development. Transportation Research Board (2002). 9
[Rob07] ROBERTS J. C.: State of the art: Coordinated and multiple views in exploratory visualization. In Fifth International
Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization (2007), pp. 61–71. 4
[TG02] TAKATSUKA M., G AHEGAN M.: Geovista studio: a
codeless visual programming environment for geoscientific data
analysis and visualization. Comput. Geosci. 28, 10 (December
2002), 1131–1144. 9
[Tuf90] T UFTE E. R.: Envisioning Information. Graphics Press,
May 1990. 4, 5
[Uni06] U NIVERSITY OF F LORIDA M C T RANS C ENTER: McTrans, a transportation planning software. Tech. rep., University
of Florida McTrans Center, 2006. 9
[Vis08] V ISUAL S OLUTIONS I NC .: VisSim, a block diagram language for creating complex nonlinear dynamic systems. Tech.
rep., Visual Solutions Inc., 2008. 9
[WDSC07] W OOD J., DYKES J., S LINGSBY A., C LARKE K.:
Interactive visual exploration of a large spatio-temporal dataset:
Reflections on a geovisualization mashup. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 13 (2007), 1176–1183. 6
[Wes04] W ESEMAN W. A.: Recording and Coding Guide for the
Structure Inventory and Appraisal of the Nations Bridges. Tech.
rep., Federal Highway Administration, 2004. 1
[WJD∗ 09]

WANG X., J EONG D. H., D OU W., L EE S.-W., R IB W., C HANG R.: Knowledge assisted visualization:
Defining and applying knowledge conversion processes to a visual analytics system. Comput. Graph. 33, 5 (2009), 616–623.
9
ARSKY

[WPF∗ 09] W ONGSUPHASAWAT K., PACK M., F ILIPPOVA D.,
VAN DANIKER M., O LEA A.: Visual analytics for transportation incident datasets. TRB 88th Annual Meeting Compendium
of Papers DVD (2009). 9
[WR03] W ROBERT A M ARSHALL R. S.: Pontis bridge management system: state of the practice in implementation and development. In 9th International Bridge Management Conference
(Jan 01, 2003). 3
[XGH06] X IAO L., G ERTH J., H ANRAHAN P.: Enhancing visual
analysis of network traffic using a knowledge representation. In
Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2008. VAST ’08. IEEE
Symposium on (31 2006-Nov. 2 2006), pp. 107–114. 9

[MRG∗ 01] M OORE M., ROLANDER D., G RAYBEAL B.,
P HARES B., WASHER G.: Highway bridge inspection: Stateof-the-practice survey. Transportation Research Record: Journal
of the Transportation Research Board 1749 (2001), 73–81. 1

c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

