DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2009.01670.x
Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2010
G. Melançon, T. Munzner, and D. Weiskopf
(Guest Editors)

Volume 29 (2010), Number 3

Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training
M. Höferlin1 , E. Grundy2 , R. Borgo2 , D. Weiskopf1 , M. Chen2 , I. W. Griffiths2 and W. Griffiths3
1 Universität

Stuttgart

2 Swansea

University

3 Terry

Griffiths Matchroom

Abstract
We present a feasibility study on using video visualization to aid snooker skill training. By involving the coaches
and players in the loop of intelligent reasoning, our approach addresses the difficulties of automated semantic
reasoning, while benefiting from mature video processing techniques. This work was conducted in conjunction
with a snooker club and a sports scientist. In particular, we utilized the principal design of the VideoPerpetuoGram
(VPG) to convey spatiotemporal information to the viewers through static visualization, removing the burden
of repeated video viewing. We extended the VPG design to accommodate the need for depicting multiple video
streams and respective temporal attribute fields, including silhouette extrusion, spatial attributes, and non-spatial
attributes. Our results and evaluation have shown that video visualization can provide snooker coaching with
visually quantifiable and comparable summary records, and is thus a cost-effective means for assessing skill
levels and monitoring progress objectively and consistently.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation—Display algorithms I.3.m [Computer Graphics]: Miscellaneous—Video visualization

by applying video visualization to snooker skill training. In
particular, we utilized the principal design of the VideoPerpetuoGram (VPG) [BBS∗ 08], which provides a focus + context visualization of a video stream. We extended the design
of the VPG to accommodate the need for depicting multiple attribute fields, including silhouette extrusion of objects,
spatial time series (e.g., the center of a snooker ball), and
non-spatial time series (e.g., ball size). This work was conducted in conjunction with a snooker club, which is led by
a former world champion and offers coaching to both professional and amateur players. It is a feasibility study to determine whether video visualization can be deployed in a
snooker club to aid snooker training, and if so, what further
investment in equipment, research and development is necessary for realizing a technology usable in everyday training. Our results and evaluation have showed that coaches can
derive quantifiable and comparable information from static
video visualizations, and for the demonstration videos, the
visualization is considered to be a cost-effective means for
assessing skill levels and monitoring progress objectively
and consistently. The study also indicates that a substantial
development effort (at the scale of 10 person-years) is likely
required to provide coaches with a suite of visual designs

1. Introduction
Cue sports encompass a family of skill-based games where
a player uses a wooden cue to strike billiard balls on a table.
Snooker is one such sport, which has been popular in many
English-speaking countries since the 19th century, and in recent years its popularity grew rapidly in Asia. The game of
snooker has benefited greatly from the arrival of color television in the early 1970s, and affordable video technology
in the 1980s. Today, videos are used extensively in snooker
coaching. In comparison with most other sports, however,
snooker is yet to benefit from modern technology-based performance analysis and coaching.
In snooker skill training, all snooker coaches encounter
the difficulty of analyzing the progress of a player quantitatively and making an objective comparison between players. Although videos provide an effective means of recording
raw data, watching videos is time-consuming and making a
comparative judgment by juxtaposing videos is generally ineffective. An average snooker shot takes about 2-3 seconds,
while a cue strikes in the blink of an eye. High-speed filming
is often necessary, but watching such slow motion videos in
everyday training is agonizingly laborious.
In this work, we address the above-mentioned difficulties
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

1053

1054

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

(a) cue and ball interaction

(b) ball trajectory

(c) alignment and delivery

(d) grip and wrist motion

(e) six example frames (t = 0, 62, 124, 186, 248, 310) from an example video, “pink-pot-b2”, for testing spin avoidance skill.

(f) six example frames (t = 0, 62, 124, 186, 248, 310) from another video, “pink-pot-c2”, for testing spin avoidance skill.

Figure 1: Example frames extracted six typical snooker skill training videos. (a-d) represent different actions that are interesting to snooker coaches. (e-f) represent two video sequences showing different spin avoidance actions (both available as
supplementary materials).
for a variety of cue actions, ball interactions and postures to
measure different skills.
2. Application Background
In this section, we first describe the specific needs of snooker
skill training, which provide the motivation for this work. We
then describe the objectives of this work, and the equipment
used in capturing the videos.
2.1. Snooker Skill Training
A good snooker player possesses a wide range of skills.
While a beginner needs to master basic skills such as maintaining correct stance and grip, forming a bridge with the
hand (a V-shaped channel), aligning the cue, and delivering a strike [Eve91], a professional needs to possess necessary mental qualities such as motivation, commitment, concentration, confidence, and decision making under pressure
[Cli81, WL02]. This application work focuses on a set of
skills at the intermediate level. Players at such a level have
already acquired basic skills as well as a reasonable feel of
the interaction between different entities (i.e., body, sight,
cue, ball, table, etc.).
For players at the intermediate level, snooker coaches are
interested in the following skills [Gri96]: speed of delivery,
application of power, stun, screw, side, cue alignment, spin
delivery, and spin avoidance. For the feasibility study, we
focused on spin avoidance: the ability to strike the cue ball
without applying unintentional spin.

Videos can help maintain a good training record, capturing problems and improvements in aspects that are not easily
observable during training. Figure 1 shows four different aspects in (a)-(d) that coaches would examine closely. Figure
1 also shows key frames extracted from two video sequences
in (e-f) capturing different spin avoidance actions. While
watching videos is intuitive and effective in many cases, it is
time-consuming, and difficult to make objective comparison.
Snooker coaches are longing for modern technologies that
can help coaching and training. In comparison with many
sports, such as tennis and soccer, the deployment of modern technology in snooker for skill training and performance
analysis is rare. In addition to scientific and technical challenges, the technology developed for snooker training must
also address the challenges of keeping the costs and resource
requirements low.

2.2. Application Stakeholders and Data Capturing
Most snooker training clubs in the UK are organized around
one or two coaches. As in most sports, coaches and professional players are highly motivated and have a great urge to
learn and use new technology. However, they have very limited prior exposure to advanced visualization. This is very
different from many other visualization applications that
mainly involve users in the scientific and medical communities. It thereby presents an extra challenge to this work.
This work is conducted in conjunction with a snooker club
that provides training to both professional and amateur players. A few of the professional players trained in the club are
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

ranked among the top 20 players in the Official 2000 World
Snooker Rankings. The club considered investing in a suite
of ceiling-mounted and computer-controlled video capture
and replay equipment, but was uncertain whether performance analysis based on watching videos is scalable from
training a few professional players to many amateur players.
We thus initiated this work as a feasibility study to help
the club answer the following questions:
1. Can video visualization complement video watching in
performance analysis and progress monitoring?
2. Can coaches recognize visual signatures in video visualization, and will they be willing to learn such skills?
3. What are the estimated costs and resource requirements
to make video visualization a usable technology in a
snooker club?
4. Does video visualization have the potential to help increase the use of a costly suite of ceiling-mounted
and computer-controlled video capturing and replaying
equipment, thus justifying the investment?
Because the proposed ceiling-mounted video capturing
equipment was not available to this feasibility study, we
made temporary provision to use portable and relatively lowcost equipment to capture video data. Two filming session
were held. The first session allowed us to finalize the equipment requirements. All videos used in the work were filmed
in the second session. In this feasibility study, we used two
Casio Ex-FH20 cameras, which support high-speed filming
at up to 1000 fps. After the trial run, we decided to use
420 fps at 224 × 168 resolution. This setting would allow
us to capture the high speed actions, such as ball spin and
cue vibration, which naked eye cannot easily observe. Although the resolution is less desirable for both video processing and visualization, it provides a worst-case scenario
to test the technology. As a snooker hall is usually not welllit and high speed filming demands good lighting, we provided four 500 W halogen floodlights mounted on two telescopic masts. Without computer-controlled camera synchronization, we used a 20 Hz strobe light to help synchronize
videos in the processing stage.
For the feasibility study, we focused on a particular cue
action namely spin avoidance. We used four videos (“pinkpot-b1”, “pink-pot-b2”, “pink-pot-c1”, and “pink-pot-c2”)
to assess the technical feasibility and provide the evaluation
with a practical case study. The videos show two different
shots, b and c, each captured from the side (1) and the front
(2). Some key frames of the front view videos are shown
in Figure 1(e-f). It is not feasible for human or machine vision to quantify spinning from normal snooker cue ball. In
comparison with other spatial transformation (e.g., translation and scaling), spinning is also more difficult to visualize [CBH∗ 06]. We made use of a training cue ball, with its
two halves colored in black and white respectively. Some of
our visualizations were purposely designed to depict spins
using this property.
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1055

3. Related Work
Video-based analysis is commonly used in modern sports
to aid performance analysis and improvement. In practice,
most such analysis is carried out by repeated video viewing and qualitative discussions in front of a television. Many
attempts have been made to use automated computer vision
techniques. The current advances in this area are represented
by a special issue in Computer Vision and Image Understanding [MP09]. These attempts generally fall into the following categories:
• Tracking — Techniques in this category provide the basis
for high-level analytical tasks by establishing the motion
trajectories of interesting objects or players. For example,
Ren et al. reported a technique for tracking a soccer ball
from multiple fixed camera views [ROJX09]. Kristan et
al. presented an algorithm for tracking multiple players in
several indoor sports applications [KPPK09]. In general,
there is a large volume of literature on tracking techniques
and their applications in sports [AC99, Gav99]. Advances
in this aspect include sophisticated algorithms for handling motion-blurred images [CG09], and graph-based association of tracked objects [YCK08].
• Indexing and retrieval — Techniques in this category allow videos of sport events to be temporally segmented, indexed with known information (e.g., event hierarchy, sensor parameters, land marks, etc.), and stored in a multimedia database for future contents-based retrieval or further video processing. For example, Pingali et al. reported
such a system for tennis games [POJC02]. Assfalg et al.
presented a system that segments a sports video into shots
of studio interviews, statistical graphics, audience, playing fields and close-up views of players. They worked
with videos of 10 different sports, with varying accuracy,
e.g., 38% (javelin), 57% (diving), 69% (tennis), 80% (soccer), and 88% (track). The technology in this aspect is relatively mature, though human involvement in correcting
erroneous classification is necessary in practice.
• Event Classification — Techniques in this category
are intended to generate semantic description of events
in videos using automated reasoning. For example,
D’Orazio et al. developed a vision system for classifying
doubtful goal scoring situations in soccer matches using
cameras located along the goal line [DLS∗ 09]. Perse et
al. presented a method for detecting three phases, namely
offensive, defensive and time-out phases, in a basketball
game, achieving 92% accuracy [PKaVP09]. In general,
the successes in this area are limited by both restricted
filming conditions and simplicity of semantic classes.
The term “visualization” in sports commonly refers to
mental practice and rehearsal [SK94], which is not the topic
of this paper. In this work, “visualization” is considered a
computational process for extracting meaningful information from sporting data, and conveying it visually to the
users. One of the common uses of visualization in sports is

1056

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

Figure 2: The basic steps of the video processing pipeline.
to depict the motion trajectories of moving objects and players. Pingali et al. presented a system for tennis with visual
designs for viewing trajectory lines, coverage maps, landing points, 2D charts and virtual 3D replay. They demonstrated that visualization can provide insights into performance, style, and strategy in sports [POJC01]. Such visual
designs are now commonly seen in sports broadcasts. Grau
et al. presented a system for reconstructing soccer matches
from multiple cameras, and allowing replay from arbitrary
viewpoints where moving objects are approximated by billboards, visual hulls or view-dependent geometry [GHK∗ 07].
Denman et al. presented a tool for summarizing ball trajectories overlaid on a video frame. They also used 2D graphs
to illustrate ball position and speed [DRK03].
Video visualization is a growing subject. Daniel and
Chen [DC03] proposed to apply volume rendering techniques to visualize information in video data. Botchen et al.
demonstrated the feasibility of visualizing video streams in
real-time with GPU-based multi-field rendering [BCWE06].
Chen et al. conducted a user study, confirming that novice
users can learn to recognize visual signatures in video visualization [CBH∗ 06]. Dony et al. [DMR05], Assa et al.
[ACC05], and Caspi et al. [CAMG06] presented techniques
for extracting important objects from different key frames,
and reconstructing a storyboard by combine different temporal objects into a single still image. Several researchers
studied the techniques for viewing multiple video streams
with their spatial context. For example, Wang et al. used
3D environment models to contextualize spatially-related
videos [WKCB07], and conducted a user study to evaluate
different design options [WKCB07]. Romero et al. made an
attempt to visualize video captured from an overhead camera [RSSA08]. Botchen et al. [BBS∗ 08] presented a focus +
context design of video visualization, combining key frames,
spatial and non-spatial attributes into a static visualization.
They created a visual representation of a continuous video
stream, called VideoPerpetuoGram (VPG), in a manner similar to an electrocardiogram (ECG) or a seismograph. We
have adopted this visual design in this work.
Overall, in comparison to the literature in video processing, the body of work in video visualization is limited. To our
knowledge, there has not been any application case study on
sports video visualization.

4. From Videos to Spatiotemporal Attributes
This work adopted the same principal pipeline of [CBH∗ 06,
BBS∗ 08], supporting video visualization with a video processing stage. This section discusses the processing requirements and briefly outlines the video processing stage, while
Section 5 addresses video visualization.
One objective of this feasibility study is to assess if
coaches can recognize visual signatures [CBH∗ 06] from
video visualization. This requires the processing stage to extract different temporal information. For example, for the
two above-mentioned shots and their video sequences (like
those in Figures 1(e-f)), this includes:
a
b
c
d

the silhouette of a ball,
the different color segments of a ball,
the center of a ball, or of each segment,
the color separation line on the black-white cue ball.

There are many solutions in the computer vision literature for such problems. In this work, we make use of mature
and fast video processing techniques to extract the desired
features, but avoid complex techniques such object classification and tracking and learning-based pattern recognition.
For example, we may apply filters to extract a pixel map of
silhouettes of all balls, and then forward such a pixel map
directly to the visualization pipeline without making explicitly recognition as if there is any ball in the pixel map or how
many. In this way, the potential errors for automatic machine
recognition are avoided, and usually visualization artifacts
caused by minor filtering errors are easily tolerated by the
human vision system.
We designed a video processing pipeline (see Figure 2)
based on the generalized symmetry transform [RWY95]
to estimate the centers and radii of the balls and to segment them. The remainder of the pipeline is based on basic
techniques provided by OpenCV [BK08]: we use a linear
Kalman filter to track the balls, and classify them according to pixel colors in their area. We then further segment
the black-white cue ball in the same way. Finally, we extract
several other features for the black and white segments, e.g.,
the number of pixels, the separation line, and the segment
centers. Further details on the video processing pipeline are
provided in the supplementary material of this paper.
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

pink-pot-b2

pink-pot-c2

(a) trajectories of ball centers

(b) trajectories of color segments

1057

VPG, with a few technical modifications to accommodate
the needs of this application. The technical contributions
to visualization are the extensions of the VPG to combine different attributes in the same visualization (multiattributes extension), and the possibility to have several temporally synchronized visualization images displayed simultaneously (multi-strand extension). As shown by Botchen et
al. [BBS∗ 08], the rendering of the VideoPerpetuoGram is
real-time and the modifications made in this paper maintain
interactive frame rates. In this section, we outline the general
considerations for the visual design, then consider the visualization of individual spatiotemporal attributes extracted in
the video processing stage (see Section 4), and finally discuss the combination of different attributes in the same visualization, and the multi-strand VPG.
5.1. General Design Principles
The targeted audience of this feasibility study includes
snooker coaches and players. We assume that these users
are not familiar with advanced visualization systems. Based
on this, the following design principles were defined, and
later improved according to the feedback from the application partners.

(c) object silhouette volume

(d) the separation edge on the black-white cue ball

Figure 3: Visualizing four different types of spatial attributes.

(a) pink-pot-b2

(b) pink-pot-c2

Figure 4: Visualizing non-spatial attributes. The radius of
the yellow tube-like object shows the temporally varying ratio of white pixels on the black-white cue ball.
5. Multi-Strand VideoPerpetuoGram (VPG)
The visualization component is based on the VideoPerpetuoGram (VPG) framework originally designed for the integration of spatial and temporal aspects in video visualization [BBS∗ 08]. We follow the focus + context design of
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Color Mapping. Color mapping should enable visualization to match the colors on snooker table as close as possible.
The trajectory of a snooker ball should ideally be depicted
using the original ball color. When there is a conflict, such
as with the background, a uniquely identifiable color should
be used within the visualization.
Providing Context. Following the VPG design, the context (i.e., key frames of a video) should be present in every
visualization. One or just a few key frames are often adequate as the scene is relatively static.
Minimizing Navigation. Since the primary advantage of
video visualization is to save time, we should not replace
the time for watching video with the time for interaction and
navigation. Hence, users are given a few fixed camera positions from which visualizations are generated. Similarly, orthographic projection is employed to avoid misleading perspective foreshortening.
Visualization Literacy. We believe that visualization literacy can be improved. We should prepare coaches and players with simple visualization designs, and gradually introduce more complex designs.
5.2. Visual Mapping of Spatial Attributes
Attributes are pieces of information extracted from a video
during the video processing stage. As shown in Section 4,
such information is obtained frame by frame. Hence, all attributes are temporal. Some attributes, such as the center of
a ball or the line separating a black-white cue ball, are inherently spatial, and can be placed in 3D space with the time as
the third dimension. We term these spatial attributes.

1058

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

Displaying spatial attributes in 3D is relative intuitive. As
shown in Figure 3(a), the center of a ball can be displayed
in conjunction with a few key frames. Similarly, we can also
display the centers of three colored segments pink, black and
white as in Figure 3(b). These time series of positions are visualized by rendering thick lines implemented as geometric
tubes and indicating the trajectories of the balls.
Note that for video “pink-pot-c2”, which did not manage
to avoid spin, the patterns in (b) are more observable than in
(a). This is because that the centers of the black and white
segments of the cue ball revolve around each other during
the spin. Nevertheless, the tubes in (a) are suitable to show
the trajectories of the balls.
The object silhouette can be displayed as a volumetric object passing through the key frames, as in Figure 3(c). The
transfer function used is similar to Ebert et al. [EMRY02],
where the RGB values in the video are preserved, and alpha is derived from image analysis results. While the object silhouette volumes are inappropriate to show the degree
of spin, they can provide the trajectories of balls preserving
original radii and colors.
The separating edge of the black-white ball is depicted
with a ribbon. A spinning black-white ball results in a twisting or broken ribbon, providing a visually intuitive way to
compare cue actions for spin avoidance. For example, as
shown in Figure 3(d), a poor shot will causes twisted or broken ribbons, while a good shot will not.
5.3. Visual Mapping of Non-Spatial Attributes
Certain temporal attributes extracted by the video processing
do not have any inherent spatial location, yet still form a time
series. We term these non-spatial attributes. For example,
the numbers of black and white pixels in the two videos in
Figures 1(e-f) give a good indication of whether the blackwhite cue ball is spinning.
In principle, non-spatial attributes can be displayed adequately using a 2D plot. However, this contradicts the principle of providing context (e.g., video frames), whenever one
can. We thus designed a context + focus visualization for the
ratio of white pixels on the black-white cue ball (Figure 4).
# white pixels
We define this ratio as: # white pixels
+ # black pixels . In the visualization, this ratio is mapped to the radius of a tube that
extends out from the corresponding ball position in the key
frame. We were curious about how potential users would react to such visualization (see Section 6).
Note that some attributes and their visual mappings provide insights into similar properties. For example, both trajectories of ball centers (Figure 3(a)) and object silhouette
volume (Figure 3(c)) show ball trajectories. The spin of a
shot is conveyed by different visual patterns: trajectories of
segment centers (Figure 3(b)), the ribbon showing the separation edge on the black-white cue ball (Figure 3(d)), and

the non-spatial ratio visualization (Figure 4). Therefore, it is
not mandatory to show all visual patterns, but the user may
benefit from several, independent visualizations in the case
of borderline shots.
5.4. Multi-Attributes VPG
Multiple attributes can be combined within a single VPG,
as demonstrated in Figure 5. In addition to the key frame(s),
each visualization shows the object silhouette, and the centers of the black and white segments. A special case of the
VPG can be created by looking along the temporal axis towards the initial key frame; implicitly registering data within
the static scene (Figure 5(a)). This special-case layout is similar to many visual representations of trajectories in videos.
While this visual design has the advantage of being intuitive,
it suffers several drawbacks. It lacks of temporal reference
for information, such as speed. It also has limited degrees
of freedom for the orientation of tracking geometries. For
example, the trajectories of color segments in Figure 3(b)
can go up and down as well as sideways. It is not easy to
depict an up and down motion with the visual design in Figure 5(a). The VPG supports arbitrary, uniform scales of the
time axis. Of course, the trajectories in Figure 5(b) are spacetime trajectories while the ones in Figure 5(a) are their projection along the time axis. The latter is more familiar to
most of novice users. Nevertheless, for the spin avoidance
videos, the coaches are not interested in the actual path of
the balls, but the juddering or deformation of the tracking
geometries. Furthermore, interpretation of space-time trajectories can be learned (as demonstrated in a large controlled
user study [CBH∗ 06], see also discussion in Section 6).
Allowing the simultaneous display of volume data and
surface geometry is a further extension to the VPG. The display of surface and volume data together is achieved by first
rendering the opaque surface geometry (with depth write and
depth test enabled), then rendering the slices through the volume (with blending and depth test enabled, but depth write
disabled).
5.5. Multi-Strand VPG
A major extension of the VPG is to enable simultaneous display of several, temporally synchronized visualization images. Multiple time-series visualizations, which we term
multi-strand, are shown side-by-side, to visualize a collection of spatial and non-spatial attributes (Figure 6). Attributes with similar spatial context may also be separated
to prevent visual overload of the user, and occlusion of the
VPG. For example, the separating edge should normally be
in a different strand from that for the ball centers, as they
frequently occlude each other.
The multi-strand VPG is motivated by the navigation cost
analysis by Ware [War04]. He discusses various methods for
navigating through information spaces and their time costs:
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

pink-pot-b2

pink-pot-c2

(a) front view

(b) side view

Figure 5: A VPG that combines object silhouette volume and
trajectories of color segments.
in the ideal visualization, all information is available on a
single high-resolution screen, because a single saccadic eye
movement will change from one space to another in about
150 ms. Meanwhile, the cognitive effort for alternative navigation methods, such as a hypertext link, takes at least 2 s.
Therefore, we have chosen a side-by-side visualization with
several attributes of up to two shots.
6. Results and Evaluation
In this feasibility study, we designed and rendered a variety
of VPG visualizations. These included:
• Spatial attributes, with key frames as context (Figures
3(a-d)).
• Non-spatial attributes, with key frame context (Figure 4).
• Combined object silhouette volume and trajectories of
color segments, with key frames as context (Figure 5).
• Multi-strand VPG (Figure 6).
It is not generally feasible to organize a user study involving a large number of snooker coaches because there are only
about 20-30 registered snooker coaches in the UK, spreading
in different parts of the country. We organized a validation
meeting with five potential users to evaluate the visual results of the feasibility study. The five participants included
two full-time snooker coaches, C1 and C2 , one of whom is a
former world champion, one sports scientist, S, who is also
a cricket coach, one intermediate-level amateur player A1 ,
and one basic level amateur player, A2 , who has a full length
snooker table at home.
Coach C2 , who is a co-author of this paper, manages a
snooker club and trains intermediate and basic level players.
The participants’ knowledge about visualization is largely
c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1059

limited to basic graph plotting, such as in spreadsheet.
Hence, an evaluation through open discussions allows us to
engage the potential users not only to provide the feedback,
but also to learn and appreciate merits of visualization.
We prepared 6 sets of questions, and organized the discussions using PowerPoint slides that also showed some example videos and visualization results. In addition, we prepared
two sets of paper copies of sample visualization results on
forms on which a coach could write further comments for
a trainee. None of the participants saw any visualization results prior to the meeting. The discussions, which took about
an hour, are summarized in a table in the Appendix (included
in the supplementary materials).
During the meeting, we introduced video visualization
gradually, by first showing a 2D example, such as a stock
market graph, and then showing a video visualization that
uses a similar visual metaphor. This was very effective in
helping the participants to understand the results of video
visualization. In general, the coaches who took part in the
meeting liked the visualizations in Figures 3(a-b), 4, 5(a),
and 6. They had some difficulties with translucent volumes
as in Figure 5(b). This may be partly because those volumetric effects are inherently more difficult to appreciate and
partly because that we did not have effective 2D stimuli to
introduce this concept. The visualization results in Figure
3(d) were not available to the meeting.
A few visualizations similar to Figure 4 were shown in the
meeting. We used Minard’s map as an introduction, which
enthused the participants and stimulated much discussions.
Figure 4 is an improved version of what were shown in the
meeting.
Participants were convinced that video visualization offers an effective means for communication, comparison, and
archiving. They also appreciated our observation that the automatic video analysis is not as readily usable as video visualization. Some participants were relieved that the technology is not ready to replace the coaches, while some remained
hopeful for a fully automatic technology.
In terms of the four questions listed in Section 2.2, we
summarize our observations based on the discussions in
the validation meeting, further engagement with the participants, and the authors’ experience throughout this feasibility
study:
1 Snooker coaches are longing for a technology that reduces time spent watching videos, and aid their analysis
and monitoring tasks. The coaches who took part in the
evaluation were not concerned with the fact that visualization needs human interpretation, and liked the idea that
they are not replaced by unreliable machine intelligence.
However, for visualization to be usable, the functionality
delivered in types of this feasibility study has to be scaled
up to some 10-20 cuing actions.
2 Coaches can learn to recognize visual signatures. In par-

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

1060

Figure 6: A multi-strand VideoPerpetuoGram comparing the two shots “pink-pot-b” and “pink-pot-c”, each captured from the side (1) and the front (2). The front view
video sequences are the same as shown in Figure 1. On the upper and lower left side, the front views of the shots are visualized by key frames, pink ball centers, and
the separation lines on the black-white cue balls represented by ribbons. The side views are displayed on the right side. The attributes shown here are key frames, object
silhouettes, and ball centers. The function plots on the left side show the ratio of white pixels of the black-white cue ball. The four curves correspond to the four different
video sequences. Their colors match with the colors of the bounding boxes containing the video names. We decided to use a 2D plot to display the non-spatial attributes
since the spatial context can be provided by temporal alignment, horizontal spatial alignment, and reference lines to the associated strands of video “pink-pot-b2” and
“pink-pot-c2”. A detailed comparison is only required between parallel views, which limits the cognitive effort. Additionally, some features can be visualized in all VPGs,
such as the trajectory of the pink ball. This may help the user to transfer the information even to orthogonal views, while information is not needed to be compared between
them.

c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

ticular, we were surprised by how quickly they transferred their learning of Minard’s map to the visualization of non-spatial attributes (Figure 4). Learning stimuli
(e.g., simpler examples) and metaphors might play an important role in learning visual signatures.
3 Visualization can be used in many aspects of snooker skill
training. In addition, the participants identified a number
of potential uses of such visualization, including (i) individual training records in the form of a collection of
reports similar to the sample paper copies, (ii) a collection of visualization results from professionals as benchmarks, (iii) introduction of standard skill tests, and (iv)
visual records of snooker equipment testing.
4 It is common for ordinary people to overestimate what
can be accomplished by machine intelligence. The initial expectation of the snooker coaches was that computer
vision techniques are readily available to analyze captured video automatically, for example, by categorizing
and recognizing various types of shots, and subtle difference in cuing actions and poses. In this study, we observed that for automatic video analysis to deliver reliable
results, it requires more sophisticated environment (e.g.,
lighting and ball textures), accurate calibration, and high
resolution and high speed cameras. The costs and inconvenience of setting up the environment for each training
test will likely outweigh the benefits from time reduction
in viewing the videos. This feasibility study made a convincing case for using video visualization as the primary
technology for supporting snooker training.
5 The snooker club has since made its investment to install
ceiling-mounted cameras, and is actively seeking financial sponsors for developing video visualization technology through a consortium of several companies and universities.
For video visualization, once a visual design is finalized
and implemented, it can generally be transferred to other
shots. However, this is usually not true for video processing. The area coverage of a shot, the number of balls, lighting, etc. could force some modification to a video processing pipeline. If more automatic classification and recognition techniques were used, the semantics of each shot have
to be hard-coded into vision algorithms. Hence, for delivering video visualization system, with 10 times of the functionality delivered in this feasibility study, and taking into
account the development cost for this feasibility study, we
estimate about 10 person-years that are necessary for realizing a usable technology in the form of an industrial product.
This includes 4 person-years for generic software features,
1 person-year for management, and 10 × 0.5 person-years
for test-specific software features. For developing automatic
video analysis to support a similar level of functionality, we
estimate at least 30 person-years that are necessary for realizing a usable system. This includes 3 person-years for
generic software features, 2 person-year for management,
and 10 × 2.5 person-years for test-specific software develc 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1061

opment (e.g., training data capturing, video processing, supervised learning, classification and results presentation).
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we have reported a feasibility training on the
application of video visualization in snooker. The study has
found that the use of automatic video analysis techniques in
practice has been hindered by several factors, such as varying accuracy, poor portability from one sport to another, and
semantic bottleneck in supervised machine learning. Existing commercial systems are limited largely to motion tracking and video editing and annotation. Viewing videos is still
the main operational mode after a video is processed by such
as system.
To make a convincing case for using video visualization
to reduce the burden of viewing videos, we developed a prototype system in conjunction with a snooker club. We have
adapted and extended the concept of VideoPerpetuoGram
(VPG) to accommodate various attributes generated at the
video processing stage. To extract these attributes even under different camera views, we adopted reliable and wellknown computer vision techniques. We have introduced a
multi-attributes extension as well as a multi-strand VPG.
Both can be utilized in other applications whenever several
attributes should be visualized in one or more VPGs simultaneously. We have learned that video visualization is a more
“transferable” technology than automated machine vision,
so it would cost less to develop in a short to medium term.
We have learned that video visualization has to cover a reasonable number of common tasks in snooker training before
it becomes cost-effective to deploy. It was a huge reward to
find out that novice users can learn to comprehend and appreciate video visualization, and to recognize visual signatures. Although they showed preference for more intuitive
visualization as a means to communicate with the players,
they enjoyed the collaboration, and determined to continue
their investment in new technologies.
This feasibility study opens up many new opportunities
for further research. We are in particular interested studying
the correlation between different snooker videos. We also
hope to identify new applications of video visualization, and
advance the video visualization technology to serve such applications.
Acknowledgment
This work was partially funded by a UK EPSRC grant
EP/G006555, by DFG as part of the Priority Program “Scalable Visual Analytics” (SPP 1335), and supported by DAAD
(PPP project ID 50023502). We are grateful to Adrian Morris for supporting the data capture exercise and coordinating the consortium for further development. We would like
to thank those who took part in the evaluation, including Sir
Terry Griffiths OBE, Dr. Richard Griffiths and Alison Parker.

1062

M. Höferlin et al. / Video Visualization for Snooker Skill Training

References
[AC99] AGGARWAL J. K., C AI Q.: Human motion analysis: a
review. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 73, 3 (1999),
428–440.
[ACC05] A SSA J., C ASPI Y., C OHEN -O R D.: Action synopsis:
pose selection and illustration. ACM Transactions on Graphics
24, 3 (2005), 667–676.
[BBS∗ 08] B OTCHEN R. P., BACHTHALER S., S CHICK F., M ORI
M. C. G., W EISKOPF D., E RTL T.: Action-based multi-field
video visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 14, 4 (2008), 885–899.
[BCWE06] B OTCHEN R. P., C HEN M., W EISKOPF D., E RTL T.:
GPU-assisted multi-field video volume visualization. In Proc.
International Workshop on Volume Graphics (2006), pp. 47–
54,135.
[BK08] B RADSKI G. R., K AEHLER A.: Learning OpenCV:
Computer Vision with the OpenCV Library. O’Reilly, 2008.

[MP09] M AGEE D., P ERS ( EDS .) J.: Computer vision based
analysis in sport environments. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 113, 5 (2009), 589–662.
ˇ
ˇ S. K.,
C
[PKaVP09] P ERŠE M., K RISTAN M., AND G. V U CKOVI
P ERŠ J.: A trajectory-based analysis of coordinated team activityin a basketball game. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 113, 5 (2009), 612–621.

[POJC01] P INGALI G., O PALACH A., J EAN Y., C ARLBOM I.:
Visualization of sports using motion trajectories:providing insights into performance, style, and strategy. In Proc. IEEE Visualization (2001), pp. 75–82.
[POJC02] P INGALI G. S., O PALACH A., J EAN Y. D., C ARL BOM I. B.: Instantly indexed multimedia databases of real world
events. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 4, 2 (2002), 269–282.
[ROJX09] R EN J., O RWELL J., J ONES G. A., X U M.: Tracking
the soccer ball using multiple fixed cameras. Computer Vision
and Image Understanding 113, 5 (2009), 633–642.

[CAMG06] C ASPI Y., A XELROD A., M ATSUSHITA Y., G AM LIEL A.: Dynamic stills and clip trailers. The Visual Computer
22, 9 (2006), 642–652.

[RSSA08] ROMERO M., S UMMET J., S TASKO J., A BOWD G.:
Viz-A-Vis: Toward visualizing video through computer vision.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14,
6 (2008), 1261–1268.

[CBH∗ 06] C HEN M., B OTCHEN R. P., H ASHIM R. R.,
W EISKOPF D., E RTL T., T HORNTON I. M.: Visual signatures
in video visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 12, 5 (2006), 1093–1100.

[RWY95] R EISFELD D., W OLFSON H., Y ESHURUN Y.: Context
free attentional operators: the generalized symmetry transform.
International Journal of Computer Vision 14 (1995), 119–130.

[CG09] C AGLIOTI V., G IUSTI A.: Recovering ball motion from
a single motion-blurred image. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 113, 5 (2009), 590 – 597. Computer Vision Based
Analysis in Sport Environments.
[Cli81]

C LIFFORD W. G.: Winning Snooker. Foulsham, 1981.

[DC03] DANIEL G. W., C HEN M.: Video visualization. In Proc.
IEEE Visualization (2003), pp. 409–416.
[DLS∗ 09] D’O RAZIO T., L EO M., S PAGNOLO P., N ITTI M.,
M OSCA N., D ISTANTE A.: A visual system for real time detection of goal events during soccer matches. Computer Vision
and Image Understanding 113, 5 (2009), 622–632.
[DMR05] D ONY R. D., M ATEER J. W., ROBINSON J. A.: Techniques for automated reverse storyboarding. IEE Journal of Vision, Image and Signal Processing 15, 4 (2005), 425–436.
[DRK03] D ENMAN H., R EA N., KOKARAM A.: Content-based
analysis for video from snooker broadcasts. Computer Vision and
Image Understanding 92 (2003), 176–195.

[SK94] S HEIKH A. A., KORN E. R. (Eds.): Imagery in Sports
and Physical Performance. Baywoord, 1994.
[War04] WARE C.: Information Visualization: Perception for Design, 2nd ed. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco,
CA, USA, 2004.
[WKCB07] WANG Y., K RUM D. M., C OELHO E. M., B OWMAN
D. A.: Contextualized videos: Combining videos with environmentmodels to support situational understanding. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007),
1568–1575.
[WL02] W ILLIAMS K., L OWE T. (Eds.): Snooker: Know the
Game. A & C Black, 2002.
[YCK08] YAN F., C HRISTMAS W., K ITTLER J.: Layered data
association using graph-theoretic formulation with applications
to tennis ball tracking in monocular sequences. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 30, 10 (2008),
1814–1830.

[EMRY02] E BERT D. S., M ORRIS C. J., R HEINGANS P., YOO
T. S.: Designing effective transfer functions for volume rendering from photographic volumes. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 8, 2 (2002), 183–197.
[Eve91] E VERTON C.: Snooker & Billiards: Technique * Tactics
* Training. Crowood Press, 1991.
[Gav99] G AVRILA D. M.: The visual analysis of human movement: a survey. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 73,
1 (1999), 82–98.
[GHK∗ 07] G RAU O., H ILTON A., K ILNER J., M ILLER G.,
S ARGEANT T., S TARCK J.: A free-viewpoint video system for
visualisation of sport scenes. SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal
(2007), 213–219.
[Gri96]

G RIFFITHS T.: Snooker – basic skills [vhs], 1996.

ˇ C
ˇ S.:
[KPPK09] K RISTAN M., P ERŠ J., P ERŠE M., KOVACI
Closed-world tracking of multiple interacting targets forindoorsports applications. Computer Vision and Image Understanding
113, 5 (2009), 598–611.

c 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

