DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2010.01758.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 29 (2010), number 8 pp. 2469–2478

Tone Mapping Operators on Small Screen Devices:
An Evaluation Study
C. Urbano1 , L. Magalh˜aes2,3 , J. Moura2,4 , M. Bessa2,4 , A. Marcos5 and A. Chalmers6
1 Escola

Superior de Tecnologia e Gest˜ao do Instituto Polit´ecnico de Leiria, Leiria, Portugal
carlos.urbano@ipleiria.pt
2 Universidade de Tr´
as-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal
{lmagalha, jpmoura, maxbessa}@utad.pt
3 Institute for Systems and Computer Engineering of Porto (INESC Porto), Porto, Portugal
4 Knowledge Engineering and Decision Support Research Center (GECAD), Porto, Portugal
5 Univerdade Aberta/DCT, Lisboa, Portugal
marcos@univ-ab.pt
6 The Digital Laboratory, WMG, University of Warwick, UK
alan.chalmers@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
In the last decade, an increasing number of techniques have been developed to reproduce high dynamic range
imagery on traditional displays. These techniques, known as Tone Mapping Operators (TMOs), have been compared
and ranked in different ways according to several image characteristics. However, none of these algorithms has
been developed specifically for small screen devices (SSD). In this paper, we present an evaluation of currently used
TMOs to show that SSDs with limited size, resolution and colour depth require specific research to find or create
an appropriate solution. The research described in this paper is based on psychophysical experiments; using three
different types of displays (CRT, LCD and SSD). The obtained results show that rankings obtained are similar for
the LCD and CRT but are significantly different for the SSD. Furthermore, these rankings show additionally that
some characteristics of TMOs need to be emphasized to obtain better high-fidelity mapped images for SSDs.
Keywords: high dynamic range, human visual system, image reproduction, psychophysics, small screen device,
tone mapping, visual perception
ACM CCS: I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation-Display Algorithms; I.4.0 [Image Processing
and Computer Vision]: General-Image Displays

1. Introduction
Nowadays, it is easy to obtain high dynamic range (HDR)
images either by capturing them from the real world with
a typical semi-pro digital camera or by rendering them on
computer. The vast ranges of intensities that are encoded
within these images are similar to what Human Visual System
(HVS) can perceive.
Although high dynamic range imagery is easily obtainable
problems arise regarding the reproduction of such rich images using common modern display devices that have low
c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics
Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by
Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4
2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

dynamic range (LDR). Therefore, it is necessary to use techniques that scale-down the dynamic range to fit the range
of the display while preserving the appearance of the HDR
image. To solve or minimize that problem, a large number
of high-quality tone mapping operators (TMOs) have been
developed.
1.1. Tone mapping operators
These mapping algorithms can be classified as global or local
[Devlin’02]. The former are simple and fast as they map each

2469

2470

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

pixel based on its intensity and global image characteristics,
regardless of the pixel’s spatial location. The later take into
account the pixel’s surroundings to be mapped. This means
that a pixel of a given intensity will be mapped to a different
value depending on whether it is located in a dark or bright
area.
Another aspect concerning tone mapping reproduction that
was not taken into account in the above classification is time.
If a TMO was designed for handling animated sequences
of images considering, the HVS adaptation over time it can
be designated as time dependent. Usually these TMOs are
global. On the other hand if a TMO was designed specifically
for isolated images, it is designated as time-independent.
Recently, some algorithms were specially created to achieve
interactive rates when running on modern graphics hardware.
Another important issue regarding TMOs lies on image reproduction. There are three possible approaches: perceptual,
cognitive and aesthetical [Cadik’06]. In the classical perceptual approach, the tone mapping operator tries to simulate the
human vision process. For example, due to scotopic vision a
scene viewed at night would be represented as blurred and
nearly monochromatic. The cognitive approach is used when
it is important to understand the fine details or the structure
of the visible lines in the result. Finally, if the goal is merely
a pleasant appearance of the image, then it is called an aesthetical approach. In this paper, we concentrate only on the
classical perceptual approach with the aim to characterize
the image quality in a perceptual sense.
Despite this large number of TMOs and premises, none
of them were specifically conceived for small screen devices
(SSDs) with very low dynamic range (VLDR). However,
some studies were also trying to improve image visualization
on SSDs such as the refinement of the CIE colour appearance
model [Park’07] and recently the development of an adaptive tone mapping that minimize visible contrast distortions
for a range of output devices, ranging from e-paper to HDR
displays [Mantiuk’08]. This technique can adjust image for
optimum contrast visibility taking into account ambient illumination and display characteristics.
SSDs, also known as small form-factor devices (SFF), are
characterized by limited size, resolution and colour depth.
Recent mobile devices are equipped with 24-bit displays
with VGA resolution (640 × 480) and can go up to 5 in
size [Capin’08]. However, typically they have LCDs screens
with about 2.5 –3.5 , a resolution of 320 × 240 (QVGA),
and 16-bit colour-depth.

1.2. Objectives
The goal of this study is to verify whether or not the development of TMOs specifically for SSD with its known
limitations in size, resolution and colour depth needs a special and different approach comparing with the existing ones.

To avoid misunderstandings it is important to emphasize that
the obtained rankings resulting from psychophysical experiments are not supposed to be a formal comparison of TMOs
because the TMO’s default parameters were used and also
because this work does not include some new important tone
mapping algorithms.

2. Previous Work
In recent years, some TMOs comparisons have been done
using psychophysical experiments where subjects compared
images mapped with different approaches. These studies differ in some aspects from each other. Some use a comparison
reference such as the real scene or the correspondent HDR
image showed on an HDR display device; some make pairwise comparison; others ask subjects to rate images. To better
analyse, them a brief description of those most often referred
in the literature are described next.
In 2003, Drago et al. had as the objective the definition
of a comparison methodology for existing TMOs to better
understand their strengths and weaknesses [Drago’03a].
Yoshida et al. conducted a psychophysical experiment
based on a direct comparison between the appearance of realworld scenes and HDR images of these scenes displayed on
an LDR monitor [Yoshida’05]. The main goal of this experiment was to assess the differences in how tone mapped
images are perceived and to find out which attributes of image
appearance account for these differences when tone mapped
images are compared directly with their corresponding realworld scenes rather than with each other.
Ledda et al. made a series of experiments using for the
first time an HDR display device for TMOs evaluation
[Ledda’05]. The main purpose of this investigation was not
simply to determine which is the best algorithm compared
to the HDR reference, but more generally, to propose an
experimental methodology to validate such operators.
In 2006, Cadik et al. presented an overview of image quality attributes of different TMOs and proposed a schema of
relationship between these attributes leading to the definition
of an overall image quality measure [Cadik’06]. The authors
performed subjective psychophysical tests to prove the proposed relationship scheme and also to evaluate existing tone
mapping methods with regard to these attributes. In 2008,
Cadik et al. extended their previous experiments with two
new scenes (an outdoor scene and a night scene) using an
identical design conception [Cadik’08].
The work done by Ashikhmin and Goyal in 2006 showed
that it is important to use real environments and scenes to
meaningfully judge and compare relative performance of
tone-mapping techniques [Ashikhmin’06].
Yoshida et al. in 2006 had as major outcome a better understanding of how users adjust TMO parameters to achieve

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study
Table 1: Resume of previous TMO comparison studies.

2471

This study about prior experiments for TMO comparison
was used to conceive our own experimental design. The advantages and disadvantages of each experiment were very
helpful to avoid an ad hoc and erroneous experimental design. As an example of some important item we take into
account were the use of the real scene as reference so that
each participant decision was not made by self preference or
likeness but by similarity with the real scene; the use of a considerable and statistically accepted number of participants in
each experiment; paired comparison; maximum randomization; constant environment illumination conditions, etc.
It is important to remark that the aim of this work is not
comparison of the results of our work with the ones above because the TMOs, attributes, conditions and mainly the goals
are completely different.
Our experimental design is described in Section 3.1.
3. Research Methodology
Great care must be taken when designing psychophysical
experiments to ensure that the experimental framework is
valid and robust and ensure the use of randomization and
avoiding biased variables.
3.1. Experimental design
An initial experimental design was defined and presented at
IASK2007 [Urbano’07]. This has been subsequently modified to improve its suitability for the goals of this work. A
description of the experimental design is described later.

either the best looking images or the images that are closest
to the real-world scenes [Yoshida’06]. They proposed, based
on this knowledge, a better parameterization of a generic
TMO that is controlled by two parameters: anchor white and
contrast.
In 2007, Kuang et al. also made an evaluation of HDR
rendering algorithms trying to find out the ‘best’ TMO
currently available [Kuang’07]. They also provided a general psychophysics-based evaluation framework for testing
TMOs.
Table 1 summarizes the main experimental design features
used in these studies.
In fact, all these TMOs comparisons were made using
traditional displays with sizes not less than 14 inch. None
used SSDs as the output device for the tone mapped images.

Two sets of experiments were conducted each one using
a different scene. Each set of experiments had three parts,
one using two traditional CRT displays, a second using two
traditional LCD displays and a third using two SSD displays
(PDAs). In this study, the term traditional display refers to
CRTs or LCDs with a screen size not less than 14 inch. The
PDAs have been chosen because they present characteristics
that are representative of a typical SSD. In the experiment’s
description, the term PDA is used throughout instead of SSD.
In all cases within the experiments, subjects were asked to
make paired comparison (also known as forced choice comparison or two alternative forced choice) and choose one of
the two tone mapped images shown on the two calibrated display devices that looked most similar to the real scene in front
of them (Figure 1). In each comparison, the subjects made the
choice based on four (separately) specific image properties
being tested. The properties evaluated were colour, detail,
contrast and naturalness. These were chosen because they
are known to well characterize an image [Cadik’06] and also
because they are simple to understand by participants that
are not experts in computer graphics. Examples of different
images varying the four image properties were shown to each
participant for better and homogeneous understanding.

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2472

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

Figure 1: Experiment in progress using LCDs.

Figure 2: Macbeth chart.

Although the use of paired comparison technique implies
a large number of trials which becomes time consuming,
such a technique makes it easier to evaluate and compare the
performance of each subject and is considered to be more
accurate and precise than rating [Kuang’07].
3.1.1. Research hypothesis
We predicted that the most appropriate TMO is different for
PDAs compared to a traditional display. The experimental
hypothesis was thus that there exists a significant difference
between the obtained TMO ranking for a PDA and the ones
obtained for traditional displays. This hypothesis was tested
against the null hypothesis (H 0 ), which maintains that there
are no differences between rankings.

Figure 3: Two kinds of Snellen chart.

H0 : rankingSSD = rankingCRT = rankingLCD .

3.1.2. Participants
Six different groups of 19 people each participated in the experiments (two scenes × three display types), making a total
of 114 subjects. Although these included several graduate
students having diverse backgrounds, most of them were not
experts in tone mapping or human perception. All subjects
had normal or corrected to normal vision, with ages ranging
from 18 to 40 years old. Enough time was given to each observer to adapt to the light level at the experiment location
before starting the experiment (from 2 to 3 min.). No time
limit was imposed on the selection process.
3.1.3. Conditions
A scene with a high range of intensities was carefully created
for each experimental set. They are indoor scenes under controlled illumination environment comprising a light source
and many specifically chosen objects. All scenes included

Macbeth charts and two different kind of Snellen chart, see
Figures 2 and 3 because these objects enabled the subjects to
better evaluate the colour and detail attributes when comparing each pair of tone mapped images with the real scene in
front of them.
The HDR images were acquired for each scene using a
Canon EOS 350D digital camera. Three photos with varying
exposition time were taken from a tripod in the same position and viewing angle the participants would have. The
final HDR images were generated using Photomatix Pro
[Photomatixpro] (Figure 4). The other scene is illustrated in
Figure 5 and is characterized by having objects with high
level of specularity.
Seven tone mapped images were then created using Qtpfsgui [Qtpfsgui] and the tone mapping operators
used were: Gradient Domain [Fattal’02], Spatially Varying
[Ashikhmin’02], Bilateral Filtering [Durand’02], Logarithmic Mapping [Drago’03b], Local Photoreceptor Based [Pattanaik’00], Photographic Tone Reproduction [Reinhard’02]
and Photoreceptor Model [Reinhard’05].

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

2473

Figure 6: HTC P3300.

Figure 4: HDR image creation from Scene 1.
Figure 7: Points 1, 2 and 3 are the possible resizing states
in the mapped image generation process.
we got a total of 2 scenes × 19 participants × 3 display
types × 4 attributes × 21 pairs = 9576 values of observation.
Three different types of display devices were used for
each scene. First, the tone mapped images were displayed
on two 17 inch CRT Dell, then on two 17 inch TFT LCD
Dell and at last on two HTC P3300 with 2.8 inch display size
(Figure 6).

Figure 5: Scene 2.

These TMOs were chosen for the experiment because we
already have theirs implementations and are believed to represent the high-quality techniques for still images.
The default parameters of each TMO were used since that
was not relevant for the purpose of the experiments.
Each participant was asked to observe all possible pair
combinations of the tone mapped images, for a total of 21
different pairs of images. On every occasion each participant
observed two images plus the real scene. The real scene was
located at the centre and should be used as reference for
the comparisons. At the left and right, tone mapped versions
of the reference were shown on calibrated display devices
(CRT, LCD or PDA). To avoid confusions each subject was
informed that they have to evaluate perceptual similarity. For
example, it was bad if an image has less detail than the real
scene. It is also bad if it has more detail. So, the closer to the
real scene the better it should be. As result of all experiments

For each experiment, the devices were carefully s-RGB
calibrated. Great care with devices calibration was taken.
Display devices with same mark and model do not assure
similar visualization. That happened even with PDA where
some device rejections were made. The PDA device can
only enable brightness calibration making very hard to find
two similar devices. In the traditional monitors, the gamma
value was carefully calibrated to match the gamma used by
algorithms because most TMOs require this issue for best
performance. The images shown on the 17 inch CRT and
LCD devices had resolutions of 1024 × 682, whereas the
ones shown on the PDAs had a resolution of 240 × 320
(QVGA).
To achieve these resolutions some resizing had to be done
since the photos captured by the digital camera had resolution of 3456 × 2304. The resize could be done in one of
three possible states of the mapped image generation process
(Figure 7).
After performing some simple visual tests, we observed
that all solutions lead to different results. However, comparing the three resulting images, the worst seems to be the one
achieved at point 2. Because usually the HDR images will
not be specially generated for PDA, we assume that the resize should occur at points 2 or 3. In our experiments, we

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2474

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

decided to make the resize at point 3 because, as said before,
it generally leads to visually better results. Anyway, the resize was performed the same way for all TMO, making this
issue not relevant for the experiments purposes. Resizes were
done using ACDSeePro image software from ACD Systems
[Acdseepro].
There were thus two independent variables (the displays
devices and the TMOs) and four dependent variables (the
image attributes).
3.1.4. Procedure
A pilot test was performed with a few experienced participants to refine the experimental conditions and procedures.
Each subject made his/her choice based on a specific property being tested. All pairs of images were randomly shown
and the participant had to choose the image which is perceivably similar to the real scene in front of him/her based on the
specified property. The subject identified his/her choice by
clicking on that image first, then clicking on the other one.
Special software was developed to manage when and where
each image was to be shown and to store the results.
Each participant took about 20–30 min to complete the 21
pairs × 4 attributes = 84 comparisons.
4. Results and Discussion
As already mentioned, although the use of paired comparison
technique implies a large number of time-consuming trials,
such an approach makes it easier to evaluate and compare
the performance of each subject.
The advantage of paired comparison is not only simplicity, because subjects only have to make straightforward judgments, but it also allows an evaluation of the transitivity, that
is, the within-subject consistency of the data, as well as the
between-subject consistency. Part of our analysis procedure
is very similar to that used by Ledda et al. [Ledda’05] and is
described later.
For statistical analysis purposes, for each scene, 12 preference matrixes were created (three device types and four
image attributes). For example, Table 2 shows the preference
Table 2: PDA’s preference matrix for the colour attribute in the
first scene.

TMO

Fa

Dr

Du

As

Pa

R2

R4

Total

Fa
Dr
Du
As
Pa
R2
R4

–
12
12
10
2
15
8

7
–
10
8
1
10
3

7
9
–
7
1
10
5

9
11
12
–
3
11
6

17
18
18
16
–
18
18

4
9
9
8
1
–
8

11
16
14
13
1
11
–

55
75
75
62
9
75
48

matrix for the colour attribute evaluated in PDAs where, for
each row, one can observe how many times a specific TMO
was preferred against the others, for example Drago’s TMO
(Dr) was preferred 12 times when compared with Fattal’s
TMO (Fa). Note that we decided to use simplified designation for each TMO where Fattal’s TMO is Fa, Durand’s
TMO is Du, Ashikhmin’s TMO is As, Pattanaik’s TMO is
Pa, Reinhard2002’s TMO is R2 and Reinhard2004’s TMO is
R4.
If a participant preferred TMO A rather B and B rather C
then logically he/she would prefer A rather C. If this happens for all judgments the full consistency/transitivity will
be achieved. The coefficient of consistency, ζ [Kendall’40],
allows an evaluation of the transitivity for each participant.
The coefficient of consistency is define as
24
ζ =1−

1
t 2
(t − 1) −
24
2

pi −

t −1
2

t 3 − 4t

2

,

where t is the number of TMOs to compare and pi is the
number of preferences scored by TMOi (i = 1, 2, . . . , t). For
example, Table 2 shows that Fattal’s TMO scored 55 in the
first scene for the colour attribute in PDA.
Values of ζ close to 1 indicate that there were good consistency within-subject. For example, the scene 1 participants’
coefficient of consistency for the contrast in the CRT was
0.8276.
Another important measure is the between-subject consistency or agreement. This can be done using the Kendall
Coefficient of Agreement [Kendall’40] define as
2
u=

i=j

pij
2

s
2

t
2

− 1,

where pij is the number of times TMOi is preferred to TMOj
and s is the number of subjects.
Because the number of subjects is odd (19), the Kendall’s
u ranges from −1/19 (when agreement is minimum) and 1
(when agreement is maximum). To measure the significance
of the Coefficient of Agreement, we may test the null hypothesis H 0 against the alternative hypothesis H 1 , where
H0 : no agreement between subjects
H1 : degree of agreement greater than if the evaluation of
the comparison had been done randomly
We may use the chi-squared test statistics (χ 2 ) to determine
the significance of u [Siegel’98].
χ2 =

t(t − 1)(1 + u(s − 1))
,
2

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

2475

Table 3: Tables showing the Kendall coefficient of agreement (u), coefficient of consistency (ζ ) and significance p according to chi-square tests
statistics (χ 2 ) for each device type and attribute. The corresponding TMO rankings are also indicated.

Table 4: Overall score of each TMO. In each column the best value(s) is(are)bolded and painted with a different colour.

χ 2 is asymptotically distributed with t(t−1)/2 degrees of
freedom. The statistically significance of the obtained values
were easily determined from tables of probability.

Yet from Table 3 it is possible to observe all the partial
TMO rankings for each type of display device and comparison criterion.

Table 3 shows that the agreement among observers is statistically significant and that each observer was very consistent in his/her choices. This means that we have a valid and
good base of work.

Table 4 shows the overall score for each TMO highlighting
the differences. The total absolute scores, the sum of the four
partial attribute scores, show that the results for the CRTs
and LCDs are similar, but both are very different than PDAs

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2476

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

Table 5: Final TMO rankings where the arrows show the main
changes in the PDA ranking when compared with CRT and LCD
rankings.

The results are shown in Table 6.
These tests show that we cannot reject the null hypothesis
for CRT versus LCD. This means that the rankings obtained
for the CRT and LCD are not significantly different. In other
hand, we can reject the null hypothesis for CRT versus PDA
and LCD versus PDA because p < 0.005, resulting that CRT
and LCD rankings are both significantly different from the
PDA ranking.
These results show that people see the same tone mapped
image differently in PDA than they see in CRT or LCD.
The experiments performed not only show that, in fact,
there is some differences, but also indicate guidelines for the
development or adjusting of TMOs for small screen devices
such as PDAs. Table 5 shows that the TMOs from Fattal et al.
(Fa) have raised in the ranking compared with the CRT/LCD
counterparts. In minor scale, the same happened with the
TMO from Drago et al. (Dr).

Table 6: Pearson chi-square tests [Spss].

and this happens in both scenes. This difference can also
be clearly seen in the final ranking for each TMO, Table 5.
Curiously, besides we use the default TMO’s parameters, the
resulting TMO ranking for LCD and CRT are quite similar
do the previous related work. In those studies R2 was usually
one of the betters and Dr also had a good performance; Fa
was considered not very natural.
To measure the significance, the identified difference,
Pearson’s chi-square tests were performed. As can be seen in
the first row correspondent to each scene in Table 6, there are
significant differences between CRT, LCD and PDA rankings. That is, we may reject the null hypothesis H 0 defined in
Section 3.1.1. The other three possible cases were then analysed: CRT versus LCD, CRT versus PDA and LCD versus
PDA. The corresponding null hypotheses for each one are:
H 0 : rankingCRT = rankingLCD (CRT vs. LCD)
H 0 : rankingCRT = rankingPDA (CRT vs. PDA)
H 0 : rankingLCD = rankingPDA (LCD vs. PDA)

With this observation in mind we can positively ask what
special characteristics these TMOs have? According to the
results, for traditional displays Fa’s TMO tends to exaggerate
detail reproduction but this characteristic seems to be important to maintain perceptual similarity in PDAs. Dr’s TMO,
on the other hand, is characterized by having visually more
saturated colours and the mapped image has a higher overall
brightness. These characteristics are noted as disadvantage
when displayed in a CRT or LCD, but seems to be important
factors in PDAs. This fact is indeed in accordance with deRidder’s work, where he mentioned that higher colour saturation
is needed to compensate the reduced brightness of a display
to achieve a more natural image perception [Deridder’96].
Although R2’s TMO came out on top of the CRT and
LCD rankings, it loses strength in the PDA ranking (Table
4). A possible solution to get a better TMO for PDA could be
to develop a hybrid approach using Dr’s TMO as base and
improve the details with the Fa’s TMO.
All images used in the experiments and also the collected
data can be accessed at Carlos Urbano’s personal web site
http://www.estg.ipleiria.pt/∼carlos.urbano/.

5. Conclusions
The results of the experiments show that the limited size,
resolution and colour depth of SSDs require a different approaching when tone mapping HDR images for display on
such a device.
The results also show that, in fact, some image characteristics need to be emphasized by the TMO to obtain perceptually
better images for SSDs. These characteristics are stronger detail reproduction, more saturated colours and overall brighter
image appearance.

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

The knowledge gained from these results will be used to
develop a new tone mapping operator for small screen devices, providing the best scene preservation of all attributes
including detail, contrast and colour. It will be very interesting to compare and discuss our new TMO with the display
adaptive developed by Mantiuk et al. [Mantiuk’08].
Acknowledgement
The authors thank anonymous reviewers for suggestions,
which objectively improved this paper.
References

2477

contrast scenes. Computer Graphics Forum 22 (2003b),
419–426.
[Durand’02] DURAND F., DORSEY J.: Fast bilateral filtering for the display of high-dynamic-range images. In ACM Transactions on Computer Graphics (Proc. of SIGGRAPH’02) (2002), 257–266. DOI:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/566570.566574.
[Fattal’02] FATTAL R., LISCHINSKI D., WERMAN M.:
Gradient domain high dynamic range compression. In ACM Transactions on Computer Graphics (Proc. of SIGGRAPH’02) (2005), 249–256. DOI:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/566570.566573.

[Acdseepro] ACDSEEPRO: ACD Systems.
[Ashikhmin’02] ASHIKHMIN M.: A tone mapping algorithm
for high contrast images. In Proceeding of the Thirteenth
Eurographics Workshop on Rendering (Pisa, Italy, 2002),
pp. 145–156.
[Ashikhmin’06] ASHIKHMIN M., GOYAL J.: A reality check for
tone-mapping operators. ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception 3 (2006), 399–411.
[Cadik’06] CADIK M., WIMMER M., NEUMANN L., ARTUSI
A.: Image attributes and quality for evaluation of tone
mapping operators. In Pacific Graphics 2006 (14th Pacific Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications)
(Taipe, Taiwan, 2006), pp. 35–44.
[Cadik’08] CADIK M., WIMMER M., NEUMANN L., ARTUSI
A.: Technical Section: Evaluation of HDR tone mapping
methods using essential perceptual attributes. Computer
Graphics 32 (2008), 330–349.
[Capin’08] CAPIN T., PULLI K., AKENINE-M¨OLLER T.: The state
of the art in mobile graphics research. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 28 (2008), 74–84.
[Deridder’96] DERIDDER H.: Naturalness and image quality: saturation and lightness variation in color images of
natural scenes. J. Imaging Sci. Technol. 40 (1996), 487–
493.
[Devlin’02] DEVLIN A. K., CHALMERS A., WILKIE A.,
PURGATHOFER W.: STAR: tone reproduction and physically
based spectral rendering. In State of the Art Reports, Eurographics 2002 (2002).

[Kendall’40] KENDALL M. G., BABINGTON-SMITH: On the
method of paired comparisons. Biometrica 31 (1940),
324–345.
[Kuang’07] KUANG J., YAMAGUCHI H., LIU C., JOHNSON G. M.,
FAIRCHILD M. D.: Evaluating HDR rendering algorithms.
ACM Transactions on Application Perception 4 (2007), 9.
DOI: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1265957.1265958.
[Ledda’05] LEDDA P., CHALMERS A., TROSCIANKO T., SEETZEN
H.: Evaluation of tone mapping operators using a high
dynamic range display. ACM Transactions on Computer
Graphics (Proc. of SIGGRAPH’05) 24 (2005), 640–
648.
[Mantiuk’08] MANTIUK R., DALY S., KEROFSKY L.: Display
adaptive tone mapping. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 Papers. ACM, Los Angeles, CA, 2008,
pp. 1–10.
[Park’07] PARK Y., LI C., LUO M. R., KWAK Y., PARK D.,
KIM C.: Applying CIECAM02 for mobile display viewing conditions. In Proceedings of the 15th Color Imaging
Conference (Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2007).
[Pattanaik’00] PATTANAIK S. N., TUMBLIN J., YEE H.,
GREENBERG D. P.: Time-dependent visual adaptation for
fast realistic image display. In ACM Transactions on Computer Graphics (Proc. of SIGGRAPH’00) (2000), 47–53.
DOI: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/344779.344810.
[Photomatixpro] PHOTOMATIXPRO: http://www.hdrsoft.
com.
[Qtpfsgui] QTPFSGUI: http://qtpfsgui.sourceforge.net/.

[Drago’03a] DRAGO F., MARTENS W. L., MYSZKOWSKI K.,
SEIDEL H.-P.: Perceptual evaluation of tone mapping operators. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH 2003
Sketches & Applications. ACM Press, San Diego, CA,
2003a.

[Reinhard’05] REINHARD E., DEVLIN K.: Dynamic range
reduction inspired by photoreceptor physiology. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11
(2005), 13–24.

[Drago’03b] DRAGO F., MYSZKOWSKI K., ANNEN T., CHIBA
N.: Adaptive logarithmic mapping for displaying high

[Reinhard’02] REINHARD E., STARK M., SHIRLEY P., FERWERDA
J.: Photographic tone reproduction for digital images.

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2478

C. Urbano et al. / TMO on SSD: An Evaluation Study

ACM Transactions on Computer Graphics (Proc. of SIGGRAPH’02) 21 (2002), 267–276.
[Siegel’98] SIEGEL S., JOHN CASTELLAN N. JR: Nonparametric Statistics for The Behavioral Sciences. McGrall-Hill
International, New York, London (1998).
[Spss] SPSS:
Sciences.

SPSS—Statistical

Package

for

Visualizac¸a˜ o de Imagens HDR em Dispositivos M´oveis. In
IASK—E-Activity and Leading Technologies 2007, Porto
(2007), pp. 309–318.
[Yoshida’05] YOSHIDA A., BLANZ V., MYSZKOWSKI K., SEIDEL
H.-P.: Perceptual evaluation of tone mapping operators
with real-world scenes. SPIE 5666 (2005), 192–203.

Social

[Urbano’07] URBANO C., MAGALHA˜ ES L., MOURA J., MARCOS
A.: Concepc¸a˜ o de Experiˆencias Psicof´ısicas para

[Yoshida’06] YOSHIDA A., MANTIUK R., MYSZKOWSKI K.,
SEIDEL H. P.: Analysis of reproducing real-world appearance on displays of varying dynamic range. Computer
Graphics Forum 25 (2006), 415–426.

c 2010 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

