DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2010.01657.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 29 (2010), number 6 pp. 1895–1904

Application of Visual Analytics for Thermal State
Management in Large Data Centres
M. C. Hao1 , R. K. Sharma1 , D. A. Keim2 , U. Dayal1 , C. Patel1 and R. Vennelakanti1
1 Hewlett

Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, USA
ming.hao@hp.com
2 Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Konstanz, Germany

Abstract
Today’s large data centres are the computational hubs of the next generation of IT services. With the advent of
dynamic smart cooling and rack level sensing, the need for visual data exploration is growing. If administrators
know the rack level thermal state changes and catch problems in real time, energy consumption can be greatly
reduced. In this paper, we apply a cell-based spatio-temporal overall view with high-resolution time series to
simultaneously analyze complex thermal state changes over time across hundreds of racks. We employ cell-based
visualization techniques for trouble shooting and abnormal state detection. These techniques are based on the
detection of sensor temperature relations and events to help identify the root causes of problems. In order to
optimize the data centre cooling system performance, we derive new non-overlapped scatter plots to visualize the
correlations between the temperatures and chiller utilization. All these techniques have been used successfully
to monitor various time-critical thermal states in real-world large-scale production data centres and to derive
cooling policies. We are starting to embed these visualization techniques into a handheld device to add mobile
monitoring capability.
Keywords: visual analytics, cell-based, time series, non-overlapping scatter plots, thermal state management,
spatio-temporal
ACM CCS: I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation—Display Algorithms; H.5.0 [Information
Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—General

1. Introduction
Cooling is the major operational cost in a data centre. Excess
heat adversely affects uptime and equipment performance
and leads to a premature end of life for equipment. Thermal state management is crucial for a cost-effective and sustainable operation of large-scale data centres to support the
growth in computing demand [SH08, BPS06].

units and primary/secondary pumps. Data centre’s IT infrastructure includes servers, network and storage devices
housed in standard racks.

1.1. Background

There are usually five inlet sensors (blue) used for measuring incoming air temperature to the server racks as well
as five outlet sensors (red) for measuring the out-going air
temperatures from a server rack. The sensors are arranged in
descending order with sensor T1 closest to the vent tile within
a rack. In a normal situation, the sensor air temperatures have
an ascending order (T1 < T2, . . . , < T5).

Figure 1 displays a typical data centre air-conditioning environment with under-floor air distribution. Computer Room
Air Conditioning (CRAC) units cool the exhaust hot air
from the computer racks. Cooling infrastructure comprises
chillers, cooling towers, computer room air conditioning

Energy consumption in data centre cooling depends on
the distribution of cool air to the racks and the extraction of
heat from the hot exhaust air. A refrigerated or chilled water
cooling coil in the CRAC unit extracts the heat from the air
and cools it to a range of 10 ◦ C to 18 ◦ C.

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main
Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

1895

1896

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

1.2. Our contribution

Figure 1: A typical raised-floor data centre. The sensors
are arranged in ascending order with sensor T1 closest to
the vent tile within a rack. The sensor air temperatures should
be always kept in an ascending sequence T1 < T2 < T3 <
T4 < T5.
The air movers in the CRAC units pressurize the plenum
with cool air which enters the data centre through vented tiles
located on the raised floor close to the inlet of the racks. Typically the racks are laid out in rows separated by hot and cold
aisles. This separation is done for thermal efficiency considerations. Air inlets for all racks face cold aisles while hot air
is expelled to hot aisles. A number of other equipment layout
configurations and non-raised floor infrastructures also exist.
Chillers provide chilled water to the data centre room that
houses the server racks and other IT equipment.
Most data centres have four critical problem thermal states:
(1) high sensor temperatures (e.g. temperatures exceeding
35 ◦ C), (2) out-of-bound temperature-based metrics such as
Supply Heat Index (SHI) [SBP02], (3) out-of-sequence sensor temperatures within a rack (e.g. T1 > T2 in Figure 1)
and (4) abnormal chiller utilization. Detection of hot spots is
necessary to prevent temperature related failures while detection of abnormal air flows and metrics helps to identify
energy inefficiencies.
There were no tools available for administrators to reveal interactions between sensors in real time, which are
especially needed after a reorganization of racks, computers,
chillers or CRAC units. Detecting these thermal problems
usually takes more than 1 day per 100 racks. For a large-size
data centre with thousands of racks, the cost can easily reach
more than 100 man hours. Since most thermal problems are
sensitive to physical location, an onsite deployable tool is of
great advantage to administrators. Onsite problem identification and escalation prevention is much easier with a mobile
platform.
Currently, the application of visualization techniques to
the data centre infrastructure is rudimentary and limited to
the representation of geometry and modelling/design issues.
Also, visualization techniques have not been applied to realtime thermal management data from sensors. Current approaches and guidelines adopted to address energy efficient
thermal management include numerical modelling and parametric studies. Expedient visual analytics and evaluation of
immense amounts of data are needed.

Our goal was to enable data centre administrators to identify
and quickly correct abnormal thermal states to meet sustainability targets such as energy efficiency, emissions and
cooling optimization. We have developed an interactive management system that allows administrators to detect and mitigate time-critical thermal events. This system provides a
spatio-temporal overview of operations data with visual analytics capabilities and queries. In addition, we are integrating
these visual analytics techniques to HP iPAQ devices to provide mobile capabilities for onsite evaluation.
In order to optimize the data centre cooling system performance, we derive new non-overlapped scatter plot techniques to visualize the correlation between the temperatures
and chiller utilization. We also cluster the temperatures with
similar chiller utilization for data centre managers to identify
different patterns of cooling operations.

2. Related Work
Early interactive spatio-temporal displays were designed by
Andrienko et al. [And95]. Andrienko successfully developed
a series of interactive spatio-temporal visualization techniques for displaying values of numeric attributes referring
to different moments in time and locations in space. Their
work focuses on user-controlled data transformation aggregation and dynamic linking of data displays. Andrienko’s
recent work [And08] uses novel ways of aggregating movement data for visual analysis, providing both traffic-oriented
and trajectory-oriented views of the data. Andrienko employs temporal histograms and clusters to show results of
movement positions and various trips. The framework combines visualization with database techniques for handling
large datasets which is similar to our current work on spatiotemporal thermal data. Both Andrienko and our visualization
techniques enable human cognition and reasoning to direct
and control further analysis.
Compieta et al. [CMBF07] proposed a data-mining system to explore large spatio-temporal data sets. They have
developed 3D visualization techniques to display the mining
outcome, such as displaying association rules and variable
distributions. Chen et al. [CXGH08] used advanced filters,
aggregations, and pre-fetching techniques to visualize more
than a billion records with commodity hardware.
To visualize multi-attribute data sets, Seo [SS05] developed the rank-by-feature framework. The low-dimensional
projections such as histograms and scatter plots are useful
for understanding the multi-dimensional data sets.
Van Wijk et al. [WS99] developed a calendar-based visualization of large time-series data combined with a clustering
technique for users to quickly identify changes over time.
Munzner’s BinX [MUN04] can dynamically visualize time

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

1897

series across aggregation levels. Moore et al.’s Knowledge
Planes [MCFR04] are designed to monitor and manage data
computing infrastructures and events in data centres.
In contrast to the above-mentioned techniques, we focus
on the exploration of sensor temperature distributions and
thermal state changes in real-time without aggregation. Also,
we emphasize on how to visualize the relationships among
multiple attributes (e.g. racks, inlet and outlet sensors, temperatures, chiller utilization, etc). For dealing with hundreds
of sensor time series simultaneously, we add high-resolution
and automatic analysis to our previous multi-resolution time
series [HDKS07], so that data centre administrators can simultaneously analyze high-volume temperature changes.
3. High Resolution Temperature Visualization
In this paper, we introduce different cell-based visual analytics techniques with visual queries and anomaly markers to
detect various thermal states. Data centre administrators can
visualize and interact with these techniques and by selecting
certain racks or sensors they are able to incorporate their
domain knowledge in real time.
3.1. A spatio-temporal overall view
Figure 2 illustrates a sample mapping of nine racks of multidimensional thermal data to a 2-D space. We provide both

Figure 3: A high-resolution time series with a marked
anomaly (96 × 15 cells; at 1-min intervals; colour: temperature).
an overall view for the data centre thermal performance and
interactive ‘data exploration’ views for troubleshooting. Each
rectangle contains a temperature time series for one sensor.
Hot spots are marked automatically for thermal correlation
analysis and root-cause queries.
3.2. High-resolution time series
To detect abnormal operating conditions in a large thermal
data set without overplotting, we use a high-resolution colour
cell-based time series to plot actual values over time. In
Figure 3, cells of a time series are arranged from bottom to
top and left to right according to time. The size of the cells is
automatically scaled down as more cells are displayed. The
colour of a cell is the temperature value of a sensor for each
time interval. Specific colours (i.e. red, orange, etc.) represent

Figure 2: A spatio-temporal overall view (x-axis: rack aisles; y-axis: rack rows; rectangle: temperature time series; colour:
temperature). Shows an overview of nine racks residing at location (x, y). Each rack has five inlet sensors (T1–T5) with blue
border and five outlet sensors (T1–T5) with red border. Each sensor has a temperature time series.
c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1898

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

Figure 4: A Supply-Heat-Index (SHI) hourly metrics map. Each cell represents a 1-min interval, the colour of a cell is the
SHI value. Rack CB0619, Sensors T2, T3, T5 with SHI > 0.85 are marked. (x-axis: minutes (0–59) only intermittent values are
shown; y-axis: rack).

Figure 5: Visual time series for finding out of sequence sensors (x-axis: hours 0 to 23, y-axis: rack/sensor T1 to T5; colour:
temperature with a non-uniform colour scale to show dense data).

more severe conditions and alert the administrator to take
immediate action. For example, sensor T4 has a persistent
high temperature (over 35 ◦ C) starting at time 14:01 in the
marked area. Users can easily mouse over a cell and display
the time and temperature value of that cell. Also, users can
query on a marked area for what happens in a certain time
period.

4. Abnormal State Detection
We apply two new visual analytics techniques, Marker [HDKSM09] and Correlation Visual Query [HDKMS07], to vi-

sualize the thermal state problems. The Marker, as shown in
Figure 3 (sensor T4) and Figure 4 (e.g. CB0619.T2), automatically draws a rectangle around the abnormal data points
and their surrounding areas when the points exceed a certain user specified threshold. These markers guide the user
to find dangerous conditions and identify problems quickly.
Administrators can choose different colour maps to represent
temperatures as needed. A rainbow colour map is commonly
used in most data centres with blue for low, orange for intermediate and red for hot temperatures. To distinguish these
three different states, in Figures 4 and 5 a non-uniform colour
map is used for displaying the uneven high-density dataset
[HD06].

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

1899

two sensor temperatures with the highest positive or negative correlations and therefore helps administrators to also
diagnose the thermal events across racks.

4.2. Visualization of metrics

Figure 6: Correlation within a rack T4 is highly correlated
to T1 with a correlation coefficient >93%. T4 is less correlated with T2. T2 has a drop in temperature, which may be
caused by a reduced server workload or an air flow change.
The correlation coefficients of T3 and T5 with T4 (not shown)
are lower than 0.3.

Metrics are used to describe the physics behind the process responsible for the thermal states. In Figure 3, we show
the sensor temperature changes over a time period to observe each sensor temperature patterns, trends and outlets. In
Figure 4, we visualize an hourly Supply Heat Index (SHI)
metric. SHI is a measure of recirculation of the exhaust air
stream at the racket inlet to capture the mixing of hot and cold
air near the racks [SBP02]. High SHI can lead to high-energy
consumption in data centres. Each coloured cell represents
a metric value at a 1-min interval. Visualizing the evolution
of metrics using colour is better than simply plotting the actual values over time to avoid overplotting while visualizing
large data volumes. Figure 4 shows many SHI values (red)
which are beyond the normal bound of 0.85 and are marked
on rack CB0619 sensors T2 to T5. With this information,
administrators can quickly identify sensors with high supply
heat index values indicating regions of high recirculation and
then make the needed adjustment to the racks.

4.1. Visualization of hot spots
After locating the anomalies, the operator can inspect the
marked areas and perform a visual query. The query invokes
correlation mining techniques to compute the correlation between the attributes of the marked data with all other attributes in the data set. As a result of the visual correlation
query the two sensor temperatures with the highest positive or
negative correlations are shown in Figure 6. The operator can
learn from the query results, which other servers have a highly
correlated workload and refine the workload accordingly.
Figure 6 shows the top two sensors T1 and T2 which are
more related to T4 than T3 and T5 (not shown). The following observations can be made:
1. T4 (black line) has a persistent high temperature above
the threshold (>35 ◦ C) over a long period of time from
13:57 to 15:21.
2. T1’s (green line) temperatures are highly correlated
with T4. Both T1 and T4 temperatures change at the
same pace. There is a similar air flow in T1 and T4.
3. T2’s temperature (blue line) drops after 14:01. The administrator knows that this may be caused by either a
change in air flow or workload in the servers around
T2.
4. All other temperatures have a lower correlation and are
therefore not relevant for further inspection.
Note that the correlation analysis compares the selected
temperature with the temperatures of all racks and shows the

4.3. Out-of-sequence temperature detection
Within a rack, the sensor air temperature should be always
kept in an ascending sequence (e.g. T1 < T2 < T3 < T4
< T5) from bottom to top. Out-of-sequence air temperatures
are usually caused by servers not being stacked properly or
by gaps between servers leading to the mixing of hot and
cold air. To identify these problems and to improve energy
efficiency, we use a pair-wise colour cell comparison matrix. Each cell represents a two dimensional vector (location,
time). A maximum delta value (e.g. T1 + ◦ C < T2) is used
to automatically determine racks with out-of-sequence sensors and show them in the visualization (Figure 5). The delta
value can be dynamically adjusted at run time. In Figure 5,
the sensors in rack EB1307 and EB1504 have a number
of out-of-sequences events, such as the temperature of rack
EB1307 T2 (yellow) is higher than T3 and T4 (green).
Using this method, administrators are able to identify and
correct the air flow of hundreds racks in minutes with energy
savings of up to 20%. Most importantly, users can see temperature out-of-sequence distributions. Prior operation had to
copy the temperature values, paste them into a spreadsheet
sheet and then highlight the abnormal sensors. This process
usually took several hours and is prone to error.

5. Chiller Utilization Scatter Plots
Chillers (Figure 7) extract heat from the warm water and
provide cold water to the CRAC units in the data centre. The

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1900

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

Figure 7: A Chiller The chiller utilization efficiency is a
function of in-temperature Tin , out-temperature Tout and utilization %U.

extracted heat is ejected into the environment through cooling towers or heat exchangers. Evaluation of the efficiency
of the chillers and the estimation of operational uptime before the next maintenance downtime are crucial tasks. Visual
monitoring of the utilization of chillers can greatly reduce
operating expenses and downtime.
Examples of a data centre manager’s typical concerns regarding chillers are:
Q1. How to optimize cooling system performance?
Q2. How is the chiller operating (e.g. non-operational, low,
high or normal)?
Q3. What are the hourly chiller usage patterns?

To answer the above questions, we start by employing the
well-known scatter plots to visualize two attributes, chiller
in-temperature and out-temperature. There are a number of
interesting visualization techniques introduced to solve the
overlap problem in scatter plots, such as HexBin scatter plots
[HexBinR] determining the brightness value of each HexBin
cell depending on the number of data points in the cell, and
Jitter scatter plots [JitterR] which are used in R and SAS to
display jittered values against the covariate.
To visualize chiller in-temperature and out-temperatures
with chiller utilization, we map a third attribute to colour
which represents chiller utilization as shown in Figure 8(A).
In the coloured scatter plot, a data point is defined with
three-attributes (x-axis, y-axis and colour) where the xaxis is the chiller in-temperature, the y-axis is the chiller
out-temperature and colour is the chiller utilization. Administrators can easily see the high correlation between
in-temperatures and out-temperatures. All data points lie
close to the regression line, such as data point p (58◦ F, 47◦ F,
40%), which indicates that when the chiller in-temperature
has a medium-high value, then the chiller’s corresponding
out-temperature will also be in medium-high with a medium
chiller utilization (green).
However, there are several data points such as p and p1
to p8 that are located at the same x- and y-coordinates in
a scatter plot, thus causing overlap. Figure 8(A) shows that
the data point p and p1–p8 have the same x-axis and y-axis

Figure 8: Chiller utilization scatter plots (with and without overlapping). Chiller data points p1 to p8 have the same location
as data point p (Tin , Tout , %U) with different values of %U (e.g. 40–50%, from green to light green) in the rubber-band area.
c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

1901

Figure 9: Non-overlapped chiller utilization scatter plot. Each data point p (x, y, colour) represents a measurement with three
attributes x: in-temperature, y: out-temperature and colour: chiller utilization. Utilization is a measure of power consumed for
a given cooling load. Bin 6 has three utilization clusters: low (blue), normal (green) and high (yellow/orange).
location. The data point p is overlaid by the subsequent data
point p1 to p8. Overlap causes two problems in visualizing
data distributions and patterns: (1) the number of overlaid
data points is unknown and (2) the chiller utilization value of
overlaid data points is not visible.
In order to answer the first question (Q1), which is important for optimizing cooling system performance, we need to
understand the correlation of the temperatures with the chiller
utilization. The overlaid data points mask the true distribution. To solve this problem, we introduce a non-overlapped
scatter plot technique as shown in Figure 8(B). Similar to the
coloured scatter plot (Figure 8(A)), the x-axis represents the
in-temperature and the y-axis represents the out-temperature.
The colour of a data point represents the value of a third attribute, e.g. chiller utilization (%U), from low (blue), medium
(green to yellow), to high (orange to red). A data point p(x, y,
colour) is now represented by a cell, which is placed inside
the corresponding temperature bin. A bin is defined as the
number of data points having the (x, y) coordinates within
a certain x and y value ranges. The binning of the x- and
y-axes and the size of a bin are determined automatically
according to the number of the chiller’s in- and out- temperatures. For example, a data point p with (x, y, colour) = (58◦ F,
47◦ F, 40%) is positioned within the bin (55–60◦ F, 45–50◦ F,
utilization 40%).
The placement algorithm for our non-overlapping chiller
utilization scatter plots uses the size of the bin (width ×

height) and the empty spaces around the already occupied
data points to compute the best location for the data point
that would be overlaid in a regular scatter plot. Data points
P1 to P10 with the same (x, y) coordinates will be placed
in a neighbourhood around the already plotted data point P
according to the similarity of their colours. These points are
sorted by the chiller utilization and are placed close together
in the order shown in Figure 8(B) to form clusters.
The following steps describe the data point placement algorithm (Figure 8(B)):
1. Place the first data item P in the location (x, y).
2. Place the eight data items (P1–P8) around P in a rectangular shape in the direction of top, bottom, left, right
and diagonals to form the rectangular shape. The placement sequence can be altered as long as we place the
eight data points as close to p as possible.
3. Place the remaining data points (e.g. P9, P10, etc.)
around the rectangle based on following location selection criteria: The neighbourhood of the data points
should have similar values (colours).
4. Enlarge the bin size as the number of data points with
the same coordinates grows.
The resulting visualization reveals interesting distributions
and patterns, (i.e. the blue, yellow and green clusters formed
by the low, high and normal utilization, respectively, in
Figure 9) which otherwise would have been lost.

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1902

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

Figure 10: Chiller hourly utilization (drilldown from Figure 9, Bin 6) (x-axis: hour of a day, y-axis: chiller out-temperature,
colour: chiller utilization). Chiller has high capacity of utilization during hours 8 to 20 on 7/3 and 7/4 in the white circles 1 and
2. Most colours are green, yellow and red to indicate that chiller has high utilization during the day and early evening.
Figure 9 illustrates one of the time-critical applications
of weekday cooling system performance. Each data point
(x, y, colour) contains the in- and out-temperatures and chiller
utilization at 1-min intervals, and other related information
(i.e. chiller id, rack id, etc.) The bins on the x-axis have
equal width. The bins on the y-axis have different heights
according to the total number of data points within the
bins.
In this non-overlapped chiller utilization scatter plot, administrators can mouse over an interesting data point and
drilldown to the record level information, for example, to
find which chiller is not operational or has a high utilization.
Further, the administrator can easily observe the following
facts to answer the second question (Q2) on the chiller operations:
• There is a high correlation between the temperatures and
chiller utilization as shown in Bin 6 and Bin 7. The chiller
utilization increases from blue, to green, yellow and red
when the in-temperature increases from 50◦ F to 65◦ F
with the corresponding out-temperature increasing from
45◦ F to 50◦ F.
• The data points in Bin 6 show high variation in utilization of the chiller. The large blue, green, yellow and orange areas show that there are clusters with low, medium
and high utilization. The high utilization clusters indicate where large volumes of water are needed to provide
cooling.
• A few scattered outliers (red) in Bin 7 use the high 70%
utilization to bring the in-temperatures of 60 ◦ C to 65 ◦ C

to out-temperatures of 45 ◦ C to 50 ◦ C. Bin 7 requires
more attention from administrators to reduce the heat
generated by overloaded servers.
• The purple clusters in Bin 1 and Bin 3 indicate that the
chiller for those racks and servers is not operational.
• Bin 4 and Bin 5 have the least number of data points
(green and blue). Bin 6 (blue, green, yellow and orange
area) has the most number of data points and has the most
interesting chilling process for data centre managers to
optimize its cooling performance.
Hourly chiller usage pattern can be obtained by drilling
down into Bin 6 and changing the x-axis to represent time
(24 h). The y-axis is used for chiller out-temperature and
colour shows chiller utilization. This provides the answer to
the third question (Q3). The resulting visualization shown in
Figure 10 confirms that chiller utilization is higher during
the day and early evening as shown in Circle 1 and Circle 2
(more red, orange, yellow and green) than early morning
and late evening (mostly blue). This is due to high server
heat caused by running high computational-workloads on
servers. Interestingly, circle 1 and circle 2 indicate different operational patterns. Administrators can drill down for
further investigation.
6. Evaluation
Our new visual analytics techniques have been successfully employed on a daily basis in seven data centres of
different sizes, ranging from 3000 to 14 000 sq. ft. with
hundreds of racks. Several billion records from data centres

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

have been analyzed. Our data centre managers and administrators have provided positive feedback: ‘Using the visual
analytics overview with automated anomaly markers and
queries, we are now able to analyze the data easily within
seconds instead of hours it would take without these visual
techniques and we are able to rectify thermal state problems in real-time’. The following are some of their reported
results:

• A 20% energy savings by using the new out-ofsequence sensor temperature visual detection techniques.
Without the out-of-sequence temperature detection, administrators had to copy the temperature values manually
from the interfaces, paste them onto a spreadsheet and
then highlight the abnormal sensors. This was a tedious
and error-prone process.
• A 10–15% power savings by using non-overlapping scatter plots to optimize chiller efficiency, thus enabling administrators to observe chiller utilization patterns and
their correlation of in- and out-temperatures. With this
information, data centre managers were able to better
manage their cooling strategies: (1) chiller real time operations, (2) server workload balance and (3) chiller maintenance.
Previously, administrators had to calculate the differences between the in-temperatures and the outtemperatures to find the correlations with the chiller
utilization. Regular scatter plots only provided two
coordinates (x, y), resulting in limited understanding of the relationships between utilization and actual
temperatures.

7. Conclusions
The application of the new visual analytics techniques for
thermal state detection has met the data centre requirements
of running their operations, enabling quick insight into the
root-cause factors and allowing the administrators to take
corrective measures.
We have started to embed the visual analytics capabilities into a mobility-enabled visualization platform, Data
Center Mobile Studio, which is hosted on HP iPAQ 210.
This empowers onsite administrators to visualize current
thermal state information. The key technical work is centred on the ability to perform progressive visual analytics on data either from a local database cache or a web
service.
Our future work will focus on combining historical data
analysis with trends to predict anomalies before they happen
so that preemptive measures can be taken, possibly before
problems occur.

1903

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Meichun Hsu for her encouragement, and thank Manish Marwah and Cullen E. Bash for
providing comments and suggestions.
References
[And95] ANDRIENKO G., ANDRIENKO N.: Visual exploration of
the spatial distribution of temporal behaviors. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’05) (Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2005),
pp. 51–58.
[And08] ANDRIENKO G., ANDRIENKO N.: Spatio-temporal aggregation for visual analysis of movements. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on VAST 2008, OH.
[BPS06] BASH C., PATEL C., SHARMA R.: Dynamic thermal
management of air cooled data centers. IEEE Itherm06.
[CMBF07] COMPIETA C., MARTINO S. D., BERTOLOTTO M.,
FERRUCCI F., KECHADI T.: Exploratory spatio-temporal data
mining and visualization. Journal of Visual Languages
and Computing (2007).
[CXGH08] CHAN S., XIAO L., GERTH J., HANRAHAN P.: Maintaining interactivity while exploring massive time series.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on VAST (Columbus, OH, USA, 2008), IEEE Computer Society/IEEE
VGTC, pp. 59–66.
[HD06] HAO M., DAYAL U.: Methods for visualizing graphical data sets having a non-uniform graphical density for
display. US Patent 7, 046,247, May, 2006.
[HDKMS07] HAO M., DAYAL U., KEIM D. A., MORENT D.,
SCHNEIDEWIND J.: Intelligent visual analytics queries. IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
CA (2007).
[HDKS07] HAO M., DAYAL U., KEIM D. A., SCHRECK T.:
Multi-resolution techniques for visual exploration of large
time-series data. In Proceedings: IEEE VGTC Symposium
on Visualization, EuroVis (2007).
[HDKSM09] HAO M., DAYAL U., KEIM D. A., SHARMA
R. K., MEHTA A.: Visual analytics of anomaly detection in large data streams. In Proceedings: Visual Data
Analysis Conference (CA, 2009), SPIE-IS&T, pp. 91–
98.
[HexBinR] HexBin Scatter Plot released by R System.
http://rss.acs.unt.edu/Rdoc/library/hexbin/doc/hexagon_
binning.pdf. Accessed on 14 April 2010.
[JitterR] Jittered scatters are used by the R and SAS systems.

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1904

M. C. Hao et al. / Visual Analytics for Thermal State Management in Data Centers

[MCFR04] MOORE J., CHASE J., FARKAS K., RANGANATHAN
P.: A sense of place: toward a location-aware information
plane for data centers; HPL-2004–27.
[MUN04] MUNZNER T.: BinX: dynamic exploration of time
series datasets across aggregation levels. In Proceedings
of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (2004)
p. 215.
[SH08] SHARMA R., SHIH R., BASH C., PATEL C., VARGHESE P.,
MEKANAPURATH M., VELAYUDHAN S., KUMAR M.: Energy
flow in the information technology stack. ACM Compute
(2008).

[SBP02] SHARMA R., BASH C., PATEL C.: Dimensionless parameters for evaluation of thermal design and performance
of large-scale data centers. In 8th ASME/AIAA Joint Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Conf., St. Louis, MO, June
2002.
[SS05] SEO J., SHNEIDERMAN B.: A rank-by-feature framework for interactive exploration of multidimensional data
Information Visualization 2005, Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
[WS99] VAN WIJK J. J., VAN SELOW E. R.: Cluster and calendar based visualization of time series data. In Proceedings: IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, NJ,
(1999).

c 2010 Hewlett-Packard Company
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

