Usability of Associated GIS and VRML Urban Models.
Nada Brkljac, John Counsell,
Faculty of the Built Environment
University of the West of England, Bristol. Frenchay Campus,
Coldharbour Lane, Bristol, BS16 1QY, U.K.
Abstract
This paper appraises the role of Virtual reality
modelling language (VRML) based 3D computer based
Urban and Heritage models in assisting professional
collaboration on common tasks and engaging the
participation of the general public in decision making.
The University of the West of England (UWE) have
created such models of both a significant area of central
Bristol and for the Tower of London. The model and
associated information can be interactively viewed
through low-cost WWW browsers and updated on-line.

The model is held to be a useful analogue for linking
available information in more accessible form. Use of an
underlying Geographic Information System (GIS) allows
other information to be readily associated with elements
within the models. The costs of creation and ownership of
traditional and Digital Models are compared with those
of GIS generated models. Developments are discussed to
improve and ease collaborative creation and use of such
models.

1: Introduction
The graphical interface offered by WWW browsers
enhances previous computer aided design (CAD) based
models of buildings and landscape. As a multimedia tool
it enables multiple different representations of real-world
objects to be viewed on screen at once and explored
interactively by its recipients without the overhead costs
of an expensive CAD system and the skills needed to use
it. As a development of hyperlinks it enables a broader
range of connections to be freely formed between these
different representations and associations made between
graphical and non-graphical attributes (Figure 1).
Vector geometry has been used traditionally in CAD
and GIS alike both because it accords more with maps
and drawings and is a compact means of data storage that
yet can also serve to locate bitmap images. VRML is the
currently available WWW technology that enables vector
geometry to be deployed. The same WWW browser plugins support both 2D graphics and 3D models. 2D graphic
representations of buildings and landscapes may be
defined as more abstract and symbolic models than 3D.
2D representations therefore require more accordance
with formalised draughting conventions to enable
common understanding and interpretation. 3D models
tend to accord more closely with ‘real’ buildings in their
setting and hence are more immediately communicated to
a wider audience less versed in graphical conventions.
The Bristol Harbourside model is linked to
photographs, planning brief, newspaper articles on the

Figure 1 - Frames with associated
information. incorporating multiple WWW
pages, Object relates to class, instances to
linked locations of the object.
area and data in the public domain. The Tower model is
being linked to material that in contrast is in the
management domain, although also to material which
would be of interest to visitors to the Tower. Currently
such material is held in disparate forms and locations
which make it difficult for professionals to obtain an
intergrated view or communicate it without
simplification.

2: Developing 3D data exchange standards

currently 2D graphics still account for approximately
85% of all construction data exchanged between
organisations and across disparate software systems
within such organisations. Hence there has been a major
development effort put towards developing an ISO
Standard for 2D-information exchange, although a 3D
form is also under development. Of the remaining 15%,
which is 3D, a large proportion is either what is termed
‘visualisation’ or animated simulation or specialised
examples such as structural steel framework. Although
both Standards are based upon STEP and include
metadata which VRML as a standard does not yet
support, VRML browsers are being developed in
conjunction as an easy means of viewing the graphical
data held. [Haas WR. 1998]. VRML has already been
prototyped and valued as a particularly effective means of
accessing and integrating construction information in
general, using an underlying object oriented database. It
has been described as a more natural way of interfacing
with construction information as the user can visually
identify the objects of interest and retrieve information
about them. [Aouad et al. 1998].

Figure 2 - Photo-Realistic View from 3D CAD Asexisting Model of Tower Environs

3: Recent Development at UWE
While much WWW based narrative is currently 2D
or text dominated, UWE have been exploring the use of
3D Digital Models for enhancing current descriptions of
an area of central Bristol and for the Tower of London
and its surroundings. The modelling of both areas was

Figure 3 - View of Tower Model in GIS form, using
Pavan & Mapinfo
initially carried out between 1996 and 1997 using 3D
CAD tools. The resulting models were of use in
generating single illustrative images of proposed change,
in providing views that might otherwise require a
helicopter to obtain, and in generating photorealistic video
sequences with which to compare the proposed with the
existing (Figure 2). At the time both models were too
large with too high a polygon count to easily view in VR
on high-end Silicon Graphics installations. For instance
the Tower Environs model consisted of an as-existing and
an as-proposed vector geometry model each of about 90
Megabytes and over 300 Megabytes of associated digital
bitmaps. The proprietary 3D file format could not be
readily associated with other information.
During the last few months the source data has been
re-entered into a Geographic Information System (GIS), a
2D map-based spatial information system (Figure 3). A
succession of beta releases of VRML authoring software
have been used to generate VRML from the database in
the form of a 3D Model related to WWW pages of
associated information. The resulting models are not quite
as complex or as detailed as their predecessors, but can be
interactively experienced, and that experience can be
scripted. The Tower Model in VRML is currently less
than 10 Megabytes of data including bitmaps, although
more of the environs and more detail remain to be added.
At its simplest this model connects pages of HTML,
with text, images and graphs, to the appropriate parts of
the geometry of the buildings and landscape in the area
expressed in VRML.

Further development of the current model is intended
to provide narrative in the form of a guided tour of the
area enhanced by sound clips. Use of an underlying GIS
as the mechanism from which the VRML and WWW data
is published makes it possible for questions to be posed
on demand and for selected buildings and landscape to be
either brightly lit or enhanced by false colour to
demonstrate the answer. This would involve using the
GIS as an on-demand server. Work is currently under way
to implement database queries using Structured Query
Language from the VRML model & browser to the spatial
database in the GIS. The facility for updating the model
as a consequence of an external event has already been
implemented.
The quality of data available at a resolution capable
of WWW transmission limits credible viewpoints and
detail to distance rather than close up. Environments
without visible activity tend to appear sterile. Yet while
for example animated people and traffic are technically
possible their successful orchestration in 3D landscapes
has so far been found to be beyond the scope of currently
available tools. Some animation has been achieved in
development of the original CAD based model but
depends on uniform slopes or a misleadingly flat site.
Close up detail and credibility may be improved in the
VRML model by the insertion of digital images or digital
movie clips triggered by context and projected between
the Avatar and the general scene.

4: Change over Time & What If Scenarios
Some of the buildings in the Bristol Model are of
significant local or national historic importance (Figure
4). The VRML model of this substantial urban area shows
the buildings in their current context, derived from maps,
digital terrain models (DTM), digital images of street
frontages, aerial photographs of roofscapes and
calculations of building height.
A similar exercise based upon old prints and maps
could enable travel back to experience interpretations of

the past. Continuing to keep the inventory of information
about the site up to date in the longer term takes that
inventory beyond the snapshot of a single moment and
will make it possible to travel back in recent time. Timelapse photography across a site has been used as a form of
narrative in film. Similarly diurnal or seasonal change has
been used to convey the passage of time. Such techniques
may be used within the VRML model to map predicted
change. The specific visible moment can be interactively
linked to a dynamic graph to indicate the current point on

Figure 5 - View of Bristol Cathedral exported from 3DS to
VRML using Street’s original 19th Century Elevational
Drawings for elevational detail and tracery.
a time-line or to select a different moment to which to
jump (Figure 5).
GIS are often used now to model what-if scenarios of
different possible future outcomes. The close relationship
possible between GIS and VRML models permits these to
be illustrated more realistically. Hence UWE are
exploring the use of the same Harbourside model for
enhanced public participation in decision making about
future development. One similar current use of the
Harbourside model is to act as part of the briefing
documentation for a multi-disciplinary design project
based on a site within the area engaging over 40 groups of
6-7 students drawn from different disciplines acting as
design teams. A particularly weak element in previous
years in the student work has been 3D realisation and
understanding of the importance of townscape and the
impact of their proposals on the context. The process is
being evaluated to determine if use of the VRML model
leads to improvement.

5: Professional Use of Data about the Tower
Figure 4 - Photo-realistic View of 3D CAD Model of
Bristol Harbourside, Bristol Cathedral mid-top-right.

There is a substantial amount of information held by
Historic Royal Palaces and other agencies about the
Tower of London and its surroundings in addition to that

which can be derived from firsthand experience. Data
about the Tower of London is currently either held in
archives, or digitally in databases. Most of this data serves
the needs of the professional staff.
Thompson gives two basic aims for the preserver, ’to
secure what remains and to render what he secures
intelligible, both to himself and to the onlooker that he is
going to invite to the site... intelligibility is the foundation
of the whole operation of preservation and display.’ ’
Study of the relationship between written sources and
visible remains is like the reciprocating action of a piston’.
[Thompson MW. 1981]. At the Tower the results of
Primary Interpretative research are summarised by
professional staff to provide the Secondary Interpretation
experienced by the visitors. Because most of the data was
not accessible in a single unifying format and much was
still held on paper the causal link between primary
evidence and interpretation was generally broken in the
material supplied to the visitor. Hence there was no
traceable audit trail back from the secondary
interpretative material to the primary sources.
Visitor Interpretation in the sense of conservation
education includes a documentary record of the process of
Professional Interpretative use, to provide case studies or
a detective story. Visitor Interpretation in the sense of
edification involves simplifying and reworking the above
material to bring out and highlight specific moments that
catch the attention. Much of this information would be
more accessible if it was held in digital form and
manipulable through a single easy to use interface. The
Museum of London Archaeological Service for example
use a spatial database to hold a stratigraphic model of
finds, to look for patterns and discover whether they vary
over time and space, for instance to identify when finds
from a notably earlier era are in a later deposit. [MOLAS.
1995]. Four major functions have been described as
currently using information held about the Tower, those
of Curatorial Artefacts, Project Specific, Building Works,
and Historical Authenticity.
The curatorial function is that of holding a record of
the artefacts for security purposes. Where the items are on
loan an additional requirement is to manage insurance
cover. Other uses of data under this heading are for
research, and for identifying and defining specific
curatorial projects.
The project-specific function is to be able define the
historical development of the buildings prior to
undertaking any work, to identify the potential for
archaeological investigation and the need for any
preliminary investigative work. There is also a need to
define what is preserved and to provide interpretation to
the general public. Most current research consists of
typewritten reports not held digitally.
The building works function is to maintain a property
history, to inform the process of building work, and to

assist in planning maintenance works. While the set piece
and staterooms are seen as largely unchanging, there is a
continual demand for alteration and modification within
the ancillary accommodation to meet changes in use and
in accepted standards. Such ancillary accommodation
consists of offices, apartments, and the approximately 155
Casemates at the Tower.
The authenticity function is to be able to review
change over time with old prints and photographs. Old
accounts also assist in ensuring historical accuracy such
as the number of daffodil bulbs ordered for the privy
garden, which was helpful in defining the scope of its
restoration.
Most of the above needs may be defined as
professional, and by definition professionals may be
expected to invest sufficient time to gain an in depth
understanding. Meeting the fleeting needs of the one-time
non-specialist visitor may be seen as more demanding.
Yet solutions which ease access for non-specialists may
also be used to reduce the barriers that professionals face
in their shared group work use of Information and
Communications Technologies (ICT).

6: A unified digital archive of information
Part of the research by UWE has been to determine
the extent to which a unified digital archive of
information might serve the various needs which staff at
the Tower have expressed. A VRML model has been
developed to explore the extent to which such a model
can provide and enhance a common means for all to
access such information. The specific goal is to assist in
assessing the significance and the vulnerability of
elements of the cultural heritage sites. This will aid more
informed planning to conserve that significance,
providing a basis for managing and recording the process
and monitoring its effectiveness. Explaining the
significance of elements of the site is also central to
Visitor Interpretation. "Site Significance, which is
synonymous with the American term ’Park Value’ helps to
answer the question: why was this area... considered
worthy of special protection or provisions and why is it
’special’?" [HMSO. 1975]. Recording and explaining the
process underlies the more in depth interpretation that is
conservation education.

7: Collaborative group work
’Post-it’ notes and redlining techniques have been
widely used in group-work using computer aided drafting.
With the advent of ISDN and video conferencing white
boarding has become possible, which may be seen as the
interactive application of post-its and redlining. The
significant elements of the Tower itself, as with most
heritage sites, are intended to be as unchanging as

practicable. (Although its context is continuously
threatened with change.) Batch processing and
distribution of copies of the Tower model using VRML is
therefore likely to be acceptable without over-frequent
reconciliation. The model is not intended and is unlikely
to be an acceptable substitute for on site firsthand
inspection and meetings. Yet many management
discussions take place and decisions are often made while
not at the spot to which they apply. In these circumstances
the Tower model may prove a central component of an
improved white-boarding system where the model is held
locally in each instance but the animation of viewpoints
and highlighting of points of interest is exchanged
interactively.
Peters states that the camera is the user’s viewpoint, it
only becomes ’significative’ when it is shown to explain
information to others. [Peters JM. 1981]. One important
aspect of being able to explain or tell a story remotely
while using VRML is a facility with which to take control
of someone else’s browser and show them the view that
you wish them to see. In VR generally there have been
various attempts to insert a virtual guide into the scene,
but even on expensive high-end systems these have so far
seemed statue like and lacking in animation. Until these
problems can be overcome palettes of tools such as laserpointers are needed for the Avatar to deploy. In this
manner the avatar becomes a mediator between the local
user and the scene being viewed. The Avatar is not only a
representation of the local user in the scene being viewed,
it ought also to be a tool with which to take a look
through the eyes of the remote user. The Avatar may in
effect be used in the guise of a ’Spectacle de Son et
Lumière.’
VRML substitutes for some of the other illustrative
means previously used to provide effective interpretation.
VRML also adds abilities to do things that have not
necessarily been practicable before. The research at UWE
indicates that VRML can now be used both as a backbone
with which to link other media through the window of a
WWW browser and also as an embracing environment
within which various media can be set. Some
interpretation benefits specifically from modelling in 3D,
other interpretation benefits from the immediacy and
interactivity of VR, such as interactive white-boarding.
The interpretation that is appropriate to visitors may also
be useful to managers, for example removing the
buildings to look at the landscape beneath, which is a
particular benefit offered by computer modelling. Such
clarity of view of the point of interest is important,
requiring a facility with which for example to switch on
trees, switch off trees, or render both trees and intervening
buildings translucent.

8: Costs of Ownership

Long-term usability of such models remains an issue.
A close link is needed between the model building tools
and the means by which the data is acquired, in order to
maintain the model and keep it up to date. In the absence
of effective scanning or remote sensing techniques from
which to automatically generate models there is a need for
efficient survey. Collation and integration of survey data
from various sources including digital images can be
assisted by use of a Spatial or Geographic Information
System.
With conventional physical or even digital models
the costs of both recording and explaining are high.
Traditional architectural physical models can cost several
hundred thousand pounds to create depending on their
level of detail. The resources required to keep them up to
date are commensurate. This has been the basis for
justifying the cost of Digital Models. Although cheaper
the as existing and as proposed Tower of London 3D
Studio based Models created at UWE cost almost one
hundred thousand pounds. Arguably a significant
proportion of the cost was because the data available was
not in suitable form for such modelling. However few
organisations have the good fortune to be able to both
create completely new surveys of cultural heritage sites
and at the same time gain feed back from the modelling
process to re-specify the nature and the content of the
survey data. In addition to provide the resources and
expert knowledge necessary to keep such a model
containing some 90 complex building forms up to date in
conventional CAD or 3D modelling programmes is as
daunting as for the physical relief model.
Other development at UWE has been a project in
which a group of 30 students are collaborating in
groupwork to create a 3D model of the UWE Campus
including terrain on a 1 metre grid. The students have
limited previous experience of CAD and are from a
variety of disciplines. This model is based entirely on data
owned by UWE to avoid the copyright problems that
currently impede publication of such models on the
WWW. The data therefore includes 3D stereo-graphic
aerial photos, digital elevational photos, digital building
plans and site survey drawings. It is significant that it has
been necessary to deploy a range of different software
packages to accomplish the whole task of data entry and
preparation since no one package is adequate. The student
experience in collaborating in this manner is being
evaluated.
In the longer term much of the data currently being
collated from a variety of sources will be available
through remote data capture such as the Lidar aerial
survey system being deployed by the DoE which has a
claimed accuracy within a few centimetres. The same
flight is also being used to scan and coordinate colour
information.

The recent re-entry of the original source data for
both Tower and Harbourside into GIS form has provided
a comparison of time and resources with that of the
original more specialist CAD work. Development through
successive Beta versions of the software has not permitted
an exact comparison but it would now take between one
third and one sixth of the time to create a 1:1250 map tile
based model compared to the original 11 man-months
involved in the original Harbourside 3DS model.
Evidently such a model is simpler than the complex 3D
forms in the original but substitutes effectively for over
90% of that original and would provide a useful context in
which to add a CAD modelled remainder as a close-up
level of detail.

9: Suggested order of work for Urban Models
The 3D CAD based Tower Model generates Video,
which is directorial and sequential, and produces highly
credible ray-traced or radiosity rendered and shadow
casting images for embedment in documents. The VRML
model on the other hand produces a much enhanced
multi-media synthesis of hyper-linked parts of modelled
reality, text, video, database and so on, where the model
forms the backbone. Both enable views not easily seen for
reasons of cost of access, or even safety of access. VRML
can be used to affordably storyboard the 3D CAD
modelling. The 3D CAD model is too slow to use to
effectively story-board a VR experience, (between 15 and
30 minutes depending on field of view to generate a raytraced photo-realistic image on a Pentium 133 Mhz.).
VRML can also be used to build the initial stages of a
model subsequently developed further and more flexibly
in 3D CAD. Taking VRML output from the 3D CAD
model into VRML however is difficult because the direct
translators at present produce high polygon count and
over-detailed indexed face-sets rather than optimised
geometric primitives. Both file-sizes and detail are too
great. A sensible order of work has thus emerged. This
commences with initial data capture, then GIS collation,
then VRML generation, then proceeds to identify those
specific parts which lack credible detail following
generation from VRML. These parts are modelled
specifically and then pieced into the VRML model. The
final outcome may be either imported to form the basis of
a 3D CAD based model used to produce highly detailed
photo-realistic images or remain in simpler form in
VRML to create an interactive VR experience.

10: Conclusion
Current digital descriptions of building projects tend
to comprise a complex mix of 2D graphics, text and
schedules with 3D ’visualisation’. VRML alone cannot

readily incorporate these diverse media, but a WWW
browser using Frames can mix VRML with other media.
A linked under-lying spatial information system allows
the flexible extract of selected data using GIS tools that
range from simple ’cookie cutting’ to complex spatial
analysis.
2D GIS Systems are increasingly used in
management of the built environment, although often in
the restricted guise of specialist facilities management
systems. Compared to the overall task of data capture in
digital form and its validation it is relatively little extra
work to encode height data and add digital photographic
elevations. Little more is necessary to generate a 3D
VRML model that can act as an easy to use integrating
interface to the diverse non-graphical data held.
Once the model has been created it offers the
potential of off-site collaborative group work and also an
effective context in which the visual impact of proposed
changes can be evaluated. Narrative use of the model for
visitor interpretation or virtual tourism would be
enhanced by improved simulation of crowds and activity
in VRML. Collaborative work would be assisted by the
ability to remotely direct attention through a common
viewpoint and to flag points of interest.
The cost of creation of the Harbourside and Tower
Models in GIS generated VRML has already been found
to be substantially less than that of previous CAD based
modelling. Group work using students to create a shared
model has shown that the skill level is reduced and that
collaborative update of the model is greatly eased. In
addition the GIS may be described as a VRML authoring
system which enables minor changes to the model such as
additional hyper links or viewpoints to be added and republished in moments.

Acknowledgements
This work has been partly funded through the
National Creative Technology Initiative of the ESRC in
the UK.

References
HMSO 1975. ’Guide to Countryside Interpretation Part 1,
Principles of Countryside Interpretation and Interpretative
Planning’, published by HMSO.
MOLAS. 1995. The Museum of London Archaeological
Service Annual Report for 1994.
Thompson MW, 1981, ’Ruins, their preservation and
display’, British Museum Press.
Peters JM. 1981, ’Pictorial Signs and the Language of
Film’.
Haas, WR, ’STEP and its implementation in Factory
Design, the STEP-CDS Initiative’ in proceedings of the
1998 EC Product & Process Modelling Conference, BRE,
Garston Wood, UK’.
Aouad G, Child T, Brandon P, Sarshar M, 1998. ’Linking
Construction Information through VR using an Object
Oriented Environment’ in proceedings of the 1998 14th
Annual Conference of the Association of Researchers in
Construction Management.

