Visualisation of Construction Costs and Techniques of
Employment-Intensive Road Construction in Developing Areas
Filip L.M. Taylor Parkins and Robert T. McCutcheon
Department of Civil Engineering, University of the Witwatersrand
Abstract
Employment generation in the construction of
economically efficient infrastructure can contribute to the
alleviation of poverty. Practical Choice of Technique
Analysis (COTA-P) is a tool that enables decision-makers
to estimate the financial and socio-economic costs
involved in a construction. COTA-P looks at the
construction from an employment-intensive perspective,
with the underlying idea to substitute as much labour for
machines as is feasible, and to promote the use of local
labour in underdeveloped and poor areas. COTA-P
consists of a technical screening phase, a financial and
socio-economical screening phase, and thirdly the
monitoring and evaluation phase. Each phase analyses
the possibility of the enhanced use of labour. COTA-P is
programmed in a Windows 32-bit environment, and gives
the user maximum user-friendliness, while allowing for
extensive manipulation of the core variables and
parameters, thus enabling the user to analyse various
scenarios in a short time.

1: Introduction and conference context
Employment-intensive Construction takes a special place
in the field of Civil Engineering, as it is primarily aimed
at generating employment, alleviating poverty, equalising
income inequalities and capacity building in historically,
economically, politically or geographically disadvantaged
communities. South Africa emerged from the apartheid
era with a legacy of low economic growth, severe poverty
especially in rural areas and among the black population,
extreme income inequality by international standards,
chronically high unemployment, a fragmented labour
market, and due to apartheid's educational system, low
skills and capacity among the black population - all linked
to the threat of further social conflict [1]. Hence,
employment-intensive construction methods have
enormous potential in these areas.
It is exactly here that this research attempts to
contribute; by critically developing and examining a
socio-economic decision model that promotes the use of a
high number of unemployed people in the construction

industry during the construction and maintenance of both
the existing infrastructure and the much needed new
infrastructure.
This decision tool is called Practical Choice Of
Technique Analysis, or COTA-P. The COTA-P tool
attempts to improve and evaluate decisions made in the
field of employment-intensive engineering, by comparing
the construction of infrastructure, and especially roads,
with different degrees of machine-intensity and labourintensity. This makes COTA-P a unique tool, as it interactively analyses employment-intensive, developmentorientated, road construction projects by means of hightech tools such as customised computer database programs
and choice of technique models.

2: Introduction to employment-intensive
construction
From a theoretical perspective, supported by experience
elsewhere in Africa, there are reasons for considering that
properly structured programmes based on the use of
employment-intensive methods, rather than conventional
equipment-intensive technology, should be established.
Such a programme would construct and maintain the
required
physical
infrastructure,
thus
creating
employment, skills and institutional capacities [2].
However, this mode of employment generation has to be
socio-economically efficient to make best use of the
scarce resources.
The origins of current interest in employmentintensive methods on a world-wide scale can be traced to
the instigation of the World Employment Programme
(WEP) by the International Labour Office (ILO) in
Geneva in 1969. The objective of the WEP was to try to
define an employment-oriented development strategy.
Even though concern for employment remains a
cornerstone of the employment-intensive programmes,
other considerations strengthen the arguments for
adopting an employment-intensive approach to public
works. First are the modest development prospects
confronting many developing countries, especially the
majority in Sub-Saharan Africa. Second are the positive
achievements with labour-based road works since the

WEP was launched. These achievements have shifted the
debate from employment per se so that current
employment-intensive projects and programmes embrace
a multiplicity of objectives.
From
the
socio-economic
viewpoint,
an
employment-intensive operation is generally known as an
operation in which proportionately more labour is used
than other production factors. Employment-intensive
construction is defined as follows [2]:
The economically efficient employment of as
great a proportion of labour as is technically
feasible to produce as high a standard of
construction demanded by the specification and
allowed by the funding available.
Conventional, machine-intensive road construction is
highly equipment-intensive, with generally only some 10
per cent of the total construction costs going to labour,
while in employment-intensive rural road engineering up
to 65 to 70 per cent of total construction costs could go to
labour; i.e. more than 600% as much [3]. This is achieved
largely through the creation of individual, community and
institutional capacities by the establishment of large,
carefully planned, long-term national programmes.
Hence, Employment-Intensive Construction is the
effective substitution of labour for equipment and results
in a significant increase in employment opportunities per
unit of expenditure (for example from 10% to 50%, as
opposed to contractors who claim to be "employmentintensive", with a "40%" increase, meaning an increase
from 10% to 14%).
To
avoid
confusion,
Employment-Intensive
Construction is not the use of large numbers of people on
relatively unplanned emergency or relief projects to
construct something of ill-defined quality and value; that
is "labour-extensive" [2]. Labour-extensive construction
emphasises the size of the labour force rather than the
product or productivity.
Progress in productive employment generation is
severely limited by engineers and planners who express
reservations regarding the financial and socio-economic
costing, product quality, time consumption and labour
management of employment-intensive works by
comparison with equipment-intensive construction
methods. Although these assertions may be challenged
from both a theoretical and practical perspective, these
views are still widely held. Numerous practical and
research projects have shown that employment-intensive
construction is an option well worth considering under
certain conditions. The World Bank carried out extensive
studies and showed that employment-intensive projects
can be technically feasible and economically efficient.

But, this research was a mammoth work [4,5] and cannot
be easily repeated. However, this question of costcompetitiveness between employment-intensive and
machine-intensive techniques cannot be ignored, because
it is so often raised in debates. The majority of properly
planned operations in South Africa has been costcompetitive and studies of work elsewhere in Africa have
come to the same conclusion. Therefore, it has been
necessary to develop a method to compare financial and
socio-economic costs of using employment-intensive and
machine-intensive construction methods.

3: Introduction to COTA
Since the early days of Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA), it
has been a tool used in the analysis and choice of
infrastructural
construction
projects.
However,
'conventional' CBA does not contribute significantly to the
analysis of the socio-economic effects of the reverse
substitution of labour for equipment [6]. That is one of the
reasons that the COTA methodology has been developed.
COTA is a decision making tool that enables the user to
identify the most suitable portions of the construction
project or construction item where labour effectively
could be substituted for equipment, and it enables policy
and decision makers to assess the (socio-) economic costs
and employment implications of such a substitution.
COTA and COTA-P are partially based on earlier work by
the ILO [7, 8, 9].

3.1:

COTA Characteristics

1. COTA is a Decision-Making Tool
COTA was originally developed [10] as a decision path
and computer spreadsheet model, to estimate and predict
the financial and economic costs and employment
implications of a theoretical employment-intensive
constructed urban busroute with a Waterbound Macadam
basecourse.
2. Incremental Approach to Increasing Labour-Intensity
Some types of public works, such as masonry stormwater
and housing are traditionally highly employmentintensive. Thus employment-intensive construction of
these types of work may be carried out without a prior
period of technical development work, training, capacity
building, and related institutional changes. However, other
types of public works are conventionally built using
highly mechanised construction techniques. In order to
ensure high product quality and reasonable financial cost,
employment-intensive construction of these types of
works should be preceded by a process of technical
development work (including the identification of
appropriate designs), institutional change, training and

capacity building. Thus, the labour-intensity of the
construction industry should be increased incrementally,
while the capacity of the industry to build more and more
types of public works using cost-effective employmentintensive techniques is developed [11].
3. COTA compares machine-intensive and employmentintensive projects
COTA enables employment-intensive costs (both
financial and socio-economic) to be compared to
machine-intensive costs. A decision regarding the use of
labour in that particular project can then be taken.
However, data about employment-intensive road
construction projects in South Africa is often scarce and
not consistently documented. Therefore, a calibration with
international data is necessary to come to a realistic
comparison with local machine-intensive construction
projects.
4. Two Main Assumptions
The following two assumptions are crucial for the COT
Analysis:
a. Decision to build has been taken
COTA does not provide decision support for the
process of choosing what to build, where to build it,
or when to build it. COTA helps decision-makers to
decide about how to build the infrastructure, given
variables and character of machines, labour and
construction activities.
b. No sacrifice in cost and/or quality
Compared to machine-intensive construction, COTA
assumes that it is possible to construct the
employment-intensive infrastructure in the same
time, for the same financial and socio-economic cost,
and with the same quality of end product, but with a
significantly increased generation of employment.

3.2:

Problems with original COTA

Research on the first version of COTA revealed some
important problems, withholding it from being applied in
practical situations [12]. First of all, in terms of
compatibility between users and computers, the original
COTA was not very user-friendly. It was written in a
Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet, and consisted of one large sheet,
containing all the variables, formulas and results. Hence,
it was hard for people other than the creator to understand
it.
Therefore, this original version was hardly utilised
by the people and organisations that could benefit from it,
like policy and decision-makers in the field of civil
construction. Until now (May 1999) COTA has been used
only once, on a feasibility study for the rehabilitation of
the National Route N1 between Matoks and Louis
Trichardt [13].

Further use of COTA failed to materialise. In the
authors' opinion, this is because of the poor
userfriendliness, transparency and direct compatibility of
COTA.

3.3:

From COTA to COTA-P

So what is the main difference between the original
COTA and the new COTA-P? COTA-P offers the user a
practical, user-friendly and straightforward method to
estimate, predict and monitor the financial and socioeconomic costs involved in an infrastructural construction.
This is achieved through a spreadsheet/database-like user
interface for the Microsoft Windows® environment. This
software will take the user through the decision steps of
COTA, and requires merely more than mouse-clicks and
the setting of some values for core variables. The results
will then give an indication whether the project or
construction item has an enhanced scope for the use of
labour, or the substitution of labour for machinery.

3.4:

Phases in COTA-P

COTA-P adopts the same phases in its decision path as the
original COTA. These steps can be summarised as
follows:
1. Technical Screening
After appropriate employment-intensive designs have
been prepared for the construction, the physical
Phase 1
Technical Screening

Phase 2
Financial and SocioEconomic Screening

Phase 3
Implementation,
Monitoring and Evaluation
Figure 1 Phases in COTA-P

characteristics of each construction item will indicate
whether it is possible to use employment-intensive
construction techniques. If the employment-intensive
methods meet the required standards, the result of this
screening phase will be the most employment-intensive
set of construction items, which are technically feasible.

2. Financial and Socio-Economic Screening
The decision rule gives the financial and socio-economic
conditions that have to be fulfilled to pass employmentintensive construction methods. The next step in this
phase is to calculate these financial costs and to establish
the socio-economic feasibility of using employmentintensive techniques. Resulting from this second analysis
is the most employment-intensive set of construction
techniques, which is technically, financially and socioeconomically feasible.
3. Implementation and Evaluation
The last phase in COTA-P provides the link between the
short term (design and costing) and the long term
(implementation, monitoring and evaluation), as the
results of monitoring and evaluation could influence
future analysis. This implies that the three parts of COTAP are interrelated and iterative, as future analysis is
informed by the results of past projects.

3.5:

Data and calibration

The underlying data and parameters of COTA-P will be
extracted both from international and local (South
African) studies on employment-intensive road
construction. The decision to focus on road construction
is based on research by the National Economic Forum [3].
Table 1 Spending on labour as % of spending on labour,
plant and materials [3]
Sector
Simple projects*
Low cost housing*
Social buildings*
Water reticulation
Stormwater
Sanitation
Roads
Dams
Railways
Forestry
Electrification
Small-scale agriculture-related
infrastructure*

Current
Spending
60-80%
25-35%
20-30%
5-15%
5-15%
5-15%
5-15%
10-20%
5-15%
25-35%
10-15%
40-80%

Maximum
Spending
60-80%
30-40%
25-35%
25-35%
40-50%
25-35%
30-80%
50-80%
20-30%
35-45%
12-17%
40-80%

development of COTA-P for Windows is to analyse and
where necessary update these data and parameters.
Calibration of COTA-P will be done by analysing the
original data and importing new data from other
international and national projects. Projects that are used
for extraction of new data and parameters are, inter alia:
1. South Africa: National Route N1 [14]
2. South Africa: Thukela Basin Project
3. Ghana Feeder Road Programme
4. Kenyan Rural Access Roads Programme
5. Malawian District Road Improvement
6. Botswana Maintenance Programme

4: Conclusions
This COTA-P version will be software independent from
spreadsheet and database software and can be used on any
computer working under a Windows 32-bit operating
system.
The main benefits of COTA-P for Windows,
maximum userfriendliness and maximum compatibility,
combined with an as high as possible calculating speed,
ensure that this version of COTA is an ideal instrument
for policy-makers and decision-makers in the field of
employment-intensive construction.
One of the problems that is currently under
investigation, is the availability and relevance of reliable
South African data and parameters. In order to get
meaningful results from COTA-P, the underlying
parameters should be as concrete as possible, and should
not allow room for ambiguous interpretation.
Another important characteristic of COTA-P is that it
is not the ultimate tendering tool or cash flow program. It
is purely a decision tool to estimate, predict and monitor
the use of labour (and its implications) in construction
projects. It is developed to offer the user a practical and
flexible decision-making tool that gives him relevant and
realistic quantitative results rather than just some
"guestimates".

5: References

* These sectors are conventionally highly employment-intensive, and hence
there is little potential for increasing labour intensity in these sectors

Table 1 shows that besides roads the several other
sectors have an enhanced scope for the use of
employment-intensive construction methods. These
sectors are therefore also targeted by the Research Centre
for Employment Creation in Construction, and the
possibility of using COTA-P on them is under
investigation.
Until now, COTA-P relies on the parameters that
were used in the original COTA. An important step in the

1. Standing, G, Sender, J et al, Restructuring the labour
market: the South African challenge, ILO Country Review book,
International Labour Office, Geneva, 1996
2. McCutcheon, R T, Employment-intensive Construction in
Sub-Saharan Africa, Habitat International, Vol 19, No 3,
Elsevier Science Ltd, Great Britain, March 1995, pp 331-355
3. NEF, Pre-investment investigation National Employment
Creation Programme for the Provision of Public Infrastructure
using Employment-intensive Methods, Report for the Technical
Focus Group prepared for NEF, Technical Committee on Public
Works Programme, South Africa, April 1994

4. Coukis, B, et al, Labor-based Construction Programs: A
practical guide for Planning and Management, IBRD/World
Bank, Oxford University Press, United Kingdom, 1983
5. World Bank, The Study of the Substitution of Labor and
Equipment in Civil Construction, Project Completion Report,
Transportation Department, IBRD/World Bank, Washington,
USA, 1986
6. McCutcheon, R T, Personal Communication, November
1996 - May 1999
7. Costa, E, et al, Guidelines for the Organisation of Special
Labour Intensive Works Programmes, International Labour
Organisation (ILO), Geneva, Switzerland, 1976, pp iv-18
8. Edmonds, G A, de Veen, J J, Technology Choice for the
Construction and Maintenance of Roads, Report CTP128, ILO,
Geneva, Switzerland, 1991, pp 14
9. Garnier, P, Introduction to Special Public Works
Programmes, ILO, Geneva, Switzerland, 1982
10. Phillips, S D , Theoretical Analysis of Employmentintensive Construction of Waterbound Macadam Roads, PhD
thesis, Wits, Faculty of Engineering, South Africa, August 1994
11. Phillips, S D, Pintusewitz, C A, McCutcheon, R T, Choice
of Technique Analysis, presented at Regional Seminar on
Labour-based Roadworks, Wits, South Africa, 16-20 January
1995
12. Taylor Parkins, F L M, Critical Analysis of the Practical
Use of Choice of Technique as a Decision Tool for LabourIntensive Construction Projects, MSc thesis, Twente University,
Holland, 1997
13. SARB, Report on the Choice of Technique Analysis for the
Reconstruction between Matoks and Louis Trichardt, Report on
SAPR Project no. D05-000-15/7, N1-27X, South Africa,
January 1995
14. SARB, The Rehabilitation of National Route N1-28 from
Matoks to Louis Trichardt, Report on contract no. SAPR
N0128005/2, Project Document, Volume 3, South Africa, July
1996

