An Analysis of Architectural Visual Reasoning in Conceptual Sketching via
Computational Sketch Analysis (CSA).

J. Mcfadzean, N.G.Cross and J.H.Johnson
The Open University, Department of Design & Innovation, Milton Keynes. MK7 6AA UK.
Abstract

Protocol studies have been successfully used to
analyse some aspects of design activityr3], but little
research has been done to examine empirically the use of
sketches during conceptual designing. One of the first
studies to empirically examine sketches in relation to
rational thought was carried out by Goldschmidtu2]. She
found that design reasoning is characterised by the
designers oscillation between two modes of thought:
‘seeing as’ which deals with figural arrangements and
‘seeing that’ which refers to non-figural issues that need to
be resolved. Ellen Dor5’t6’ carried out three protocol
analysis studies, which examined the verbal activity and
more fundamentally the graphical notation of sketches.
She examined ‘what’ designers draw, the kinds of shapes
and symbols they use. The results indicated that designers
share conventions in their use of symbols to represent
objects, configurations, and functional concerns. Suwa
and Tversky[201., Suma Purcell and Gero[“] carried out
protocol studies, with retrospective commentary. Their
research found that sketches act as an external memory
that can be inspected fat visual cues relating to the
identification of functional issues. These studies were
instigated in order to elicit information about the
graphical notation used by architectural designers during
conceptual sketching.
This paper draws on the empirical evidence discussed
above together with studies from design sciencet3] and
research
uses
cognitive
psychology [s1t91~tt1[t41.The
empirical studies of architectural design activity to
develop a new computational method for the analysis of
designers conceptual sketching activity.
This paper is based on a study designed to examine
the representational mapping between the graphical
notation used by designers in the early stages of
conceptual designing and the cognitive systems that are
activated whilst reasoning over a conceptual design
problem space. The objective of the research is to
understand how graphical notation is utilised as a problem

Visual reasoning in design is facilitated by sketching. This
research investigates how designers sketch, specifically
analysing the physical details of mark making. It relates
the graphical representations to the abstract cognitive
processes of architectural design. A new form of protocol
analysis has been developed using video and computer
records of designers’ sketching activity. The analysis of
the resulting data compares the designer’s retrospective
commentary and interpretations of the sketching activity
with the computer’s record of that activity. The analysis
will lead to a greater understanding of the relationships
between ‘Design Events’and ‘Graphical Events’ and thus
how the notational activity of sketching supports the
cognitive activity of conceptual design.

1. Introduction
Designers rely on sketching as a form of visual
reasoning, especially in the early conceptual stages of the
design process. Sketches clearly involve a complex
interaction between external representation and cognition.
Wiggins and Schont2”]; Akinul[*] describe the need to
sketch in order to conceptualise an architectural design
problem space. Ullman, Wood and Craigt221 suggest that
designers in general are especially notorious for not being
able to think without making marks on paper. Sketches
can be deconstructed in to lines, strokes and other marks’.
The way in which the sketch is composed is defined here
as the graphical notation, this includes both symbolic and
non-symbolic externalisations. The ways in which marks
are joined together to create forms is referred to in this
paper as the graphical notational language of sketching.

’ Mark is referred to here as the extemalisation of a line, that is the
movement from a point A to a point B, by a physical instrument i.e. a
pen or pencil.

258
O-7$95-0210-5/99 $10.00 0 1999 IEEE

resolution device and how it is used to define a design
problem space.
This paper focuses on the analysis of cognitive
processes, with specific emphasis on the use of sketching
to aid visual and spatial reasoning. A secondary focal
point of the paper is the sequential analysis of mark
making generated during conceptual sketching.

3. Computational Sketching Analysis
Experiment
The CSA experiment proposed four questions:
Can a predefined set of Design Events’ account for
the majority of the cognitive systems used in
architectural problem solving?
2. Can Design Events be applied consistently to a
designer’s retrospective report of their conceptual
design activity?
3. C a n G r a p h i c a l Event? be consistently and
systematically identified in the architectural designers
graphical notation?
4. Can the Graphical Events be systematically mapped
to the Design Events?
The experimental set-up, shown in figure 1, is
proposed to replicate a conventional sketching
environment with additional facilities for data capture. A
graphics tablet with plain or tracing paper overlay allows
the designer to sketch normally.
1.

2. Computational Sketch Analysis
‘Computational Sketch Analysis’ (CSA) for
conceptual design has been developed in order to elicit
graphical information at the micro level of sketching.
Research carried out by McFadzeantiG1 has revealed that
it is only by having a detailed computational
representation of the design session that analysis can be
carried out with objectivity and consistency. The results
of past research have suggested that a more extensive and
reliable data set can bet,glxtracted from computational
experimental procedures For example, by using a
computational approach, algorithms can be applied to the
recorded design session that will extract quantitative data
regarding:
a. The time spent drawing.
b. The time spent on each pencil mark.
C.
The pressure of the pencil strokes.
d. The speed at which the marks are created.
The aim of the computational analytical approach is
to record the generation of graphical notation used by
designers in order to produce a rich source of data that
allows the analysis of the use of graphical notation used
in conceptual design. This allows the definition of a
representation of the graphical notation used in sketching.
CSA consists of two functional pieces of software a
Data Collector and a Sketch Analyser. The Data Collector
captures and timestamps all the graphical data from the
design session. The Sketch Analyser serves two functions.
Firstly it acts as a record of the graphical notational
activity which can be replayed to the designer
retrospectively, for comments and analysis. Secondly the
software is an analytical tool which builds graphical
information structures in a hierarchical manner.
Because a stream of time-stamped co-ordinate data
allows graphical events to be abstracted automatically
CSA is a more appropriate method of data collection and
analysis than previous methods of data collection for
study of sketching activity. The new method of collecting
data allows a rigorous and consistent analysis of the
graphical notation used by designers.

Figure 1. Apparatus set-up
There are two forms of data capture:
The Data Capture program collects and time-stamps
the graphical data generated during a design session.
2. Video recorders capture the context of the design
actions and verbalisations of the designers.
The data capture techniques and analyses of information
throughout the design session are shown in Table 1
Five CSA experiments were undertaken using
participants who were architects with between 2 and 20
years of professional experience. The experiments were
all identical, lasting about one hour and consisted of two
tasks; a design task and a retrospective report task. The
1.

’ Design Events are processes that manipulate chunks of information,
representing important incidents that occur during the process of
conceptual designing. Design Events are not considered to be mutually
exclusive thus a chunk of information may have more than one Design
Event attached to it.
‘Gruphicul Evenfs are processes that manipulate ‘chunks’ of graphical
information that emerge out of the sketching activity.

259

Experimental
procedure

Computer

Video 2

Video 3-retrospective
analysis

3. Extract

Using the Sketch Analyser the experimenter

Transcribe the video tape

Transcribe the video tape

Data

investigates the graphical data for graphical events
4. Analyse

(Sketch Analyser) Automatic generation of

Investigate the tape for design events

Investigate the tape for design
events

graphical events

Table 1. The data capture and analysis procedures
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Abstraction of the Design Problem,
Reasoning,
Problem defining/ Resolving,
Reflection,
External Representations,
External visualisation Problems.
The results of the statistical analysis of the data,
showed that the assessment of the participant’s
retrospective reports, in terms of the Design Events
classification-encoding schema, allows a rigorous means
by which to segment and encode verbal protocols. The
approach also allows a rigorous and consistent analysis of
architectural design activity and the use of visual and
spatial reasoning in the early stages of conceptual
designing[16]

design task asked the participants to design a smokers
lodge (an outdoor shelter for smokers) for a University
campus. Participants were given a design brief, after
which they were taken to a site that could potentially
house the lodge. On returning they were asked to produce
conceptual designs, on an A3 graphics tablet and using a
lead pencil on the paper provided. The task was recorded
using the ‘Data Collector’. Following the design task, the
designers reviewed their sketching activity using the
Sketch Analyser and they were asked to report on what
they were thinking when they were generating the
graphical notation.
A classification-encoding schema was derived from
the design literature [71[181[211[‘01 and an initial interpretation
of the retrospective report task, based on the idea of
‘Design Events’. ‘Design Events’ are incidents that can be
considered to be important because they change the state
of the design problem space in a significant way. They
are the verbalisations of cognitive operations that have
taken place during the design process. Thus a set of
‘Design Events’ will not contain all verbal protocols;
rather they are nominal data types that are associated with
aspects of the designers verbalisations. An Example of a
‘Design Event’ is the use of sketches as an External
Memory Aid. The classification-encoding schema
suggests the following instance of such an event:
a. Exemplars are recalled from memory and either
written or drawn so that they are stored as an external
memory
b. The designer writes down a possible problem in order
to deal with it later
C.
The designer draws in order to aid recollection from
memory.
d. The designer writes in order to visualise and record a
concept.
e. The designer writes as a thought occurs.
A detailed discussion and analysis of Design r._.
Events is
discussed by McFadzean, Cross and Johnson”“. Nine
Design Events define the classification-encoding schema:
1. External memory aid,
2. Emergence,
3. Requirements,

4. Analysis of Visual and Spatial Reasoning
In the early stages of the design sessions the
participants described a process of externalising symbolic
information in order to place the design problem in the
mind. From an analysis of the retrospective reports of all
the participants, the process was one of externalising
information in order to extract it from long-term memory.
As demonstrated from the following quotes all
participants set out the constraints, elaborated on elements
of the brief, and on knowledge gained from other places.
[Participant 41:
“Right well, firstly what’s going on here is I’m writing down, in
no particular order various thoughts that occur to me about the
building, [in order] to try and sort of fix the thing in my mind.
It’s not the content it’s the process that got me interested in it. [I
jotted them down] to put them in my head. It was just a question
of a sort of process of writing them down that sort of helps you
clarify the things in your head.”

[Participant 51:
“Just to kind of remind myself of the context that I was going to
be putting things into. I’m just trying to set the scene in my own
head.”

As has been previously suggested by GoldschmidtLi2]
at this point in the design process, there seems to be no

260

logical sequence of decisions that stem from one another.
In fact the participants seem to want to encourage nonlinear thoughts that did not make the concepts concrete.
[Participant 21:

represented back-to-back. The participant’s retrospective
report of the reasoning is described below, along with the
externalisations of their visual reasoning (Figure 2).

“I’m thinking about the main bits that are written in the text,
about what is required. At this point [I was just drawing and
writing] these icons so that I can refer back to them. I was
thinking, or I think I had the pre-conception in my mind, [for]
although you are trying to think really clearly and allow
anything to spring into your mind it doesn’t happen like that,
because within seconds of anything unfortunately your brain has

A. “A conical roof, a little round roof and light (Figure 2.1). I
looked at it and I thought no that’s too enclosing. You need a
much more open form really... So then I started just thinking
about how a curved form could be built (Figure 2.2). This sort
of light. just little posts in the ground and then everything
could be built of that. It’s [about] visual affect, or was it [about]
ventilation and opening? ”

decided on things.”
An analysis of the transcripts via the classificationencoding schema showed that the use of the Design Event
- External Memory aid - was prevalent in the early stages
of the design sessions and at this stage the use of
graphical notation can be associated with non-linear
reasoning within the design problem space. The results
indicate that the representations generated to aid memory
are used to influence the emergence of design in the
following ways:
Emergence - The designer indicates that
a. A shape is derived from consideration of previously
written text
b. By looking at a previously depicted shape a different
or new shape emerges.
A Visual memory arises from text or a drawing.
:: ‘A new’ concept emerges out of the drawing or
thinking about the text
e. A Shape arises from dimensions or structured
reasoning
The results suggest that emergence is explicitly
defined by the use and perception of graphical notation.
This is in line with previous research carried out by
VerstijnenWI . Verstijnen found that sketching facilitates
the perception of emergent properties that arise from
changing the structure of an object. The research found
that emergence was usually driven by the participants
dissatisfaction with an aspect of the design. In these cases
the graphical notation that was derived from emergence
can be related to the participants verbalisations of the way
in which the drawings were constructed. For example
participants often used:
1. re-representation - the designer redraws a previously
drawn visual element
2. re-structuring - the designer draws over existing lines
or elements indicating important design features
Participant 5’s reasoning, over an aspect of the design
that was not considered to be satisfactory, resulted in the
participant re-structuring and re-representing the design.
This enabled the participant to make the transition from a
conical shape to the emergence of two semi-circular arcs,

Q. You came up [here to the top of the page] and you’ve done
these curves,
A. “Yes, I was trying to work out how I would put a roof over it
(Figure 2.3). If I just had part of a curve then you have the
problem of how do you.. .(pause). You want some shelter from
the rain and how do you hold that up? So I was trying to think
of a sort of cantilever thing up here to see if I could hold it up
like that.”
Q. You wrote a comment on here, then you came down here and
created a new representation.
A. “Yes, (Figure2.4) and it’s similar to this one up here
(Figure2.1). It’s still really about that roof. I’m still worried
about how 1 can economically hold that up because to do that
it’s actually quite expensive. Because it means things are
hanging about in mid air like that.”
A. “And the glaze roof at the top. And I’m going back
(Figure2.4) and thinking about the form of it; what it will be.
(Pause) And then I put the posts in there. It’s the form I think
I’m trying to sum really what I’ve been drawing here
(Figure2.5), the thoughts that are going through my head”

Figure 2. Graphical representations generated
during participant 5’s design session.

5. Eliciting Graphical Notation
The current research demonstrates new ways to
describe and analyse the graphical notation of conceptual
sketching. The ‘Sketch Analyser’ uses a representational
schema to determine how sketches are constructed. The
schema is derived from: Van Sommers[241 suggestion that
drawings are constructed and constrained by a set of

261

executive constraints, such as the preferred starting
position and preferred stroke direction of a line, Ullman’s,
Wood and Craigtz4] analysis of drawing and the results of
observations from the authors early empirical researchu61.
The lowest representation level is defined as types of
points(x). The next layer extracts the lines and trajectory
information, in order to define sets of graphical notation.
For example, ‘a line set’ may consist of the following
object structures: {linear-line(x), arc(x), circle(x),
threaded-link(x), threaded-linear-line(x)] (See Graph I .)
These lines then form sets of ‘primitives’ and sets of
‘forms’ that can be grouped together to produce sets of
‘representations’.
Primitives=

Forms=

Sketch = (XI c xline(x, )rajectory ) or

n=l x=0
n
c

6. Graphical Notation
At present there is no formal description of graphical
notation in conceptual designing. This makes it difficult to
analyse with any precision how and what designers draw.
It seems essential to determine via analysis of the
graphical notation, whether differentiation can be made
between non-iconic systems such as writing and
numbering and iconic systems, in a way that will reflect
perceptual constraints such as differentiation between
shapes, elements, strings, and actions. For example, the
difference in the spatial frequency of drawing, and writing
allows the classification of a graphical text mark and a
line drawing mark, permitting the separation of these
marks from each other.
This aspect of the research investigates how designers
sketch, specifically analysing the physical details of mark
making and they marks are constructed to form sketch

{comer(x),intersection(x),closed(x),
recursive_link(x), open(x))
{triangle(x),square(x),rectangle(x), polyhedron(x),
Vx [(closed(x)]]

grouping= {proximity(x),distance(x),near(x),adjoining(x),
collinearity(x), linkage(x))

representation=Ixl C C tine (1,
fl=I

)f-ajec[ory

representation(x, )

x=0

Vx grouping( X)

x=0

Graph 1. Graph diagram of the hierarchical structures that build up the sketch
A sketch may be constructed from ‘all the lines on a sheet
of paper’ or equivalently ‘the set of representations’. Graph
1 shows how the sketch is built up in a hierarchical
manner.

representations (Graph 1). Figure 3a-3c shows the
sequential analysis of sketches by a designer and the
extraction of the order and context of the graphical
notation and the extraction of single marks based on the
‘representational schema’ discussed above.

262

From a literature review of the principle investigators
in the field of drawing analysis~131~‘51~221~z41
a graphical
classification-encoding schema has been derived based on
the salient principles that govern drawing. Examples of
the taxonomy of salient graphical principles are presented
in Table 2.

7. Mapping Notation and Cognition in
Conceptual Design

Figure 3a. Sketches by a designer

Ullman, Wood and Craigt2*] claim there is strong
evidence to support the idea that drawings utilise
cognitive chunks of information and that each drawing
action represents a separate feature of the design. They
assume that when the designer is generating graphical
notation they are manipulating cognitive chunks. Ullman,
Wood and Craig t221 proposed that this manipulation of
information in a designer’s head can only be studied
through an analysis of his or her representation of these
features as text written text, words, drawing or gestures.
The research presented in this paper maps the
sketching of external representation with the abstract
cognitive processes used in the early stages of
architectural design. It is hypothesised that these
mappings will allow the extraction of denotational subsystems that relate the designers’ mode of problem solving
with the syntactic structure of the external representations.
Thus showing that graphical notation in sketching is
limited, constructed and constrained by the system of its
intended use. An analysis of the mapping between Design
Events and the Graphical Events addresses the question
how does graphical notation enable us to understand the
early stages of design? The overall aim of the research is
to discover whether designers use a single notational
language, inferring a general problem solving strategy or
use multiple notational languages that may infer different
problem solving strategies.

1

I

Figure 3b. Extracting representations, Figure
3c. Extraction of marks.
In this instance the deconstructing of the sketches
activity revealed that the representational schema allows
the perception of similar representations to be identified
through rigorous analysis. For example, in Figure 3c line
4 and line 6 have similar constructional components and
can be perceived as similar representations in Figure 3a.
Thus we are able to trace the designers evolution of the
conceptual design problem space and the designers visual
reasoning over graphical notation of the external
representations.
The participants of the CSA experiment used
many different forms of mark making. Examples of the
Sketch Analyser’s records from a participant’s design
session are shown in Figure 4.

.,

-__.
_.r<.*.

8. Conclusions
The evidence, from research in design science, design
education and cognitive science suggest that sketching,
within the design process, is a fundamental activity. It has
been shown that sketching has properties that make it
important in design. Understanding these complex aspects
of design cognition requires rigorous methods of analysis
of the graphical notational language of conceptual
sketching. The research has suggested that visual
reasoning and the ways in which it is aided by sketching
activity needs more reliable methods of data capture and
interpretation.

y

Figure 4. Graphical representations generated
during a participants design session

263

Graphical
Principles

Types

Intentions

Marks

Non-iconic marks

Constraints, functional issues, problems

1 Used for recalling information used previously

lconic marks

Copying a previously designed part over for detail
Graphical constraints

Starting position
Preferred stroke direction
Resisting anticipated embedding
Accretion

Overdrawing

3 movements

I

I
To extend the line

Return overdraw

(After a pause) recalling previous thoughts
Global creation of drawing.

Overdrawing of faint lines

1 Possible used to draw to record
Deliberate decision to use faint lines as a construction device
Suggests a degree of caution
Tentativeness

Drawing faintly

Non mark-marking,
movements

Hovering

I As drawing faintly -as above
Indecision

Moving towards and then away from the drawing area.

What to draw?

Rehearsing an intended mark

Sizing I measuring

Table 2. A summary taxonomy of salient graphical principles
The research indicates that CSA as a method of data
collection gives essential information, enabling new
methods of ‘sketch representation’ to be developed. The
CSA experimental results indicate that the application of
the analytical methodology for the assessment of
conceptual design activity provides a rigorous means by
which to segment and encode graphical notation. The
approach allows a consistent analysis of architectural
design activity and the use of graphical notation in early
conceptual design.
The research demonstrates the need for a notational
language to be applied to graphical representations. The
Data Collector and the Sketch Analyser address the
following issues:
1. The extraction of non-symbolic information and the
classification of this information into graphical units,
based on knowledge of the graphical notation and
cognitive processing of the information.
2. The appropriate development of a representation that
can deal with;
l
The represented sketch.
l
The graphical notation of the sketch.
.
The relationship between the concepts of the sketch
and the facts inferred by the graphical notation.

A key suggestion of the paper is that designers
sketching activity can be mapped to their cognitive
processing of design information. This paper has
suggested that CSA can be extended to construct a high
level cognitive analysis, so that the designers evolution of
the conceptual design problem space can be traced.
However the method of CSA, used to determine how
drawings map to the designers cognitive process needs
more work. The mappings between the designers use of
graphical notation and their cognitive processing of design
information needs to be examined in closer detail. For
example, the exact nature of the use of graphical notation
to aid visual and spatial reasoning needs close scrutiny.
This research contributes towards design education
and design science by gaining an insight into architectural
design
expertise,
its
comprehensive
through
understanding of the mapping between drawing,
conceptualisation, cognition, and complex problem
solving.

264

[ 1 S]Jenkinson, L.: 1990, Architectural concepts design and
drawing, in Dept Architecture, unpublished M.Phil Thesis,
University of Liverpool.

References
[l] Akin, 0.:1993, Architects reasoning with structures and
functions. Environment and Planning B-planning and
Design 20(3), pp.273-294.

[ 16]Kamiloff-Smith, A.:1995, B e y o n d M o d u l a r i t y : A
Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science, M I T
Press.

[2] Akin, 0. and Lin, C.: 1996, Design Protocol Data and Novel
Design Decisions, in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst,
k.(eds), Analysing Design Activity , John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
Chichester, pp. 35-63

[17]Mazijoglou, M . , Scrivener, S . a n d C l a r k S.:l996,
Representing Design Workshop Activity. .in Cross, N.,
Christiaans, H. and Dorst, k.(eds), Analysing Design
Activity, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, pp. 389-415

[3] Clapin, H.:1998, Visual Representation and Taxonomy,
proceedings of Visual Representation and Interpretation’98,
Liverpool, Foresight Centre, Springer Verlag.

[ 18]McFadzean, J: 1998, Computational Support for Conceptual
Sketching: An Analysis and Interpretation of the Graphical
Notation of Visual Representations, proceedings of Visual

[4] Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K.(ed.):1996,
Analysing Design Activity, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
Chichester.

Representation and Interpretation’98, Liverpool, Foresight
Centre, Springer Verlag.
[19]McFadzean, J., Cross, N. and Johnson, J.:1999, Drawing
and the Soliloquizing of Design Supposition. proceedings of
The 4th Design Thinking Research Symposium, MIT Press.

[5] Do, E. and Gross, M.:1996, Drawing as a Means to Design
Visual Representation, Reasoning and
Reasoning,
Interaction in Design Workshop notes, proceedings of
Artificial Intelligence in Design’96, Stanford University.

[20]Suwa, M., Gero, J. S. and Purcell, T. A.:1998a, The roles of
sketches in early design, proceedings of the 20th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society .

[6] D O , E.:1995, WhatS in a diagram that a computer should
understand? proceedings of The Global design Studio,
CAAD Futures, National University of Singapore.

[21]Suwa, M., Purcell, T. and Gero, J.:1998b, Macroscopic
Analysis of Design Processes based on a scheme for coding
designers’ cognitive actions, Design Studies, 19(4), pp.455-

[7] Do, E. and Gross, M.:1997, Thinking with Diagrams in
Architectural Design, proceedings of Thinking with
Diagrams’97, University of Portsmouth.

483.

[22]Suwa, M. and Tversky, B.:1997, What do architects and
students perceive in their design sketches? A protocol
analysis. Design studies 18(4), pp.385 - 403.

181 Do, E.:1998, The Right Tool at the Right Time:
Investigation of Freehand Drawing as an Interface to
Knowledge Based Design Tools, unpublished Ph.D, College

[23]Ullman, D.G.,Dietterich,T.G and Stauffer, L.A: 1988,A
Model of the Mechanical Design Process Based on
Empirical Data, AI EDAM 2(l), pp.33-52.

of Architecture, Colorado, Georgia Institute of Technology..
[9] Ericsson, K. A. and H. A. Simon.:1993, Protocol Analysis:
verbal reports as data, A Bradford book.

[24]Ullman, D.G., Wood,S. and Craig,D.:l990, The Importance
of Drawing in the Mechanical Design Process, Computer &
Graphics 14(2), pp. 263-274.

[lO]Finke, R. A. and Slayton, K.:1988, Explorations of Creative
Visual Synthesis in Mental Imagery, Memory & Cognition
16(3), pp.252 - 257.

[25]Van Sommers, P.:l984, Drawing and Cognition,
Cambridge University Press, New York.

[l l]Finke, R. A.,Ward, T. and Smith.:1996, Creative Cognition:
Theory, Research and applications, MIT Press.

[ 13]Goel, V.: 1995, Sketches of Thought, Bradford Books.

[26]Verstijnen, I.M.:1997, Sketches of Creative Discoveries: A
psychological Inquiry into the role of Imagery and
Sketching in creative Discovery Thesis Technische
Universiteit Delft.

[ 14]Goldschmidt, G.: 1991, The dialects of Sketching, Creativity
of Research Journal 4(2), pp.123-143.

[27]Wiggins, G. and Schon, D.A.:1992, Kinds of Seeing and
their Function in Designing, Design Studies 13(2), pp.l35-

[12]Fish, J.:1996, How sketches work., unpublished Ph.D.,
Loughborough University of Technology.

156.

265

