Molecular Dynamics Simulation and Visualization
ˇ
Roman Durikoviˇ
c
Department of Computer Software, The University of Aizu
Tsuruga, Ikki-machi, Aizu-Wakamatsu-shi, Fukushima, 965-80 Japan
Teruaki Motooka
Department of Materials science and Engineering, Kyushu University
6-10-1 Hakozaki, Fukuoka, 812-8581 Japan

Abstract
We have developed atomic-scale material models capable of melting, crystallization and amorphization. These
models feature molecular dynamics governed by Langevin
equations of motion in which particle interact through attractive covalent forces and short-range repulsion forces.
Also, we present an interactive virtual visualization tool for
the simulation of atomic scale material behavior. An application of this research is to understand the processes that
can control the quality of a single-crystal Si grown from the
melt.

1. Introduction
The quality of a single-crystal Si grown by Czochralski method [1] from melted silicon (see Fig. 1) is sensitive
on the growth conditions such as crystal growth rates and
temperature gradients at the liquid/crystal interface. Production of high quality crystal Si requires understanding of
the growth mechanism on the atomic level. One of the experimental techniques is transmission electron microscope
which gives direct images of atomic structures of crystals.
However, preparation of samples for electron microscopy
is a long process. In the approach described herein, the
molecular dynamics simulation for large-scale systems (up
to 10000 atoms) are used to model the crystal growth. Particles are objects that have mass, position, velocity, and respond to forces, they are easy objects to simulate. Despite
their simplicity, they can be made to exhibit a wide range of
interesting behavior. For example, the movement of atoms
in materials can be simulated by particles with appropriate potential functions defined in the small neighborhood of

each particle. The developed computer system enable us
modeling material behavior using the particle objects in an
interactive 3D environment. Such environment can be used
to facilitate the exploration of a structure in situations that
are difficult or expensive to reproduce experimentally.
We calculate the position of the atoms in the material
during the process and display atomic images of the crystal
structure as a function of time. In addition, several diagnostic imaging techniques that aid the analysis of structure at
atomic level: radial distribution function g r , bond angle
distribution function g  , and static structure factors S k ,
were developed. This paper proposes the approach for modeling and visualization of large scale molecular models applied on the simulation of a single-crystal Si growth from
molten silicon.







1.1. Related Work
There has been extensive research on physically based
modeling and dynamic simulations for computer graphics.
The basics of mass-spring systems and particle system dynamics including some implementation hints are well described in SIGGRAPH’94 tutorial [2]. Different approaches
have been introduced to visually model the physical processes. The physically based models capable of heat conduction, thermoelasticity, melting, and fluid-like behavior
in molten state were first described by Terzopoulos, et
al. [3]. Their model is very simplified and lack of precise
physical behavior on atomic level.
Greenspan [4] investigated various N -body systems as
discrete models of solid, liquid and gaseous media. Over
the years, much attention has been given in the physics
and chemistry literature to the development of discrete
liquid models involving aggregate molecular dynamics in

from molten silicon.

2. Molecular Dynamics
The motion of the particle i is governed by a pair of the
first-order ordinary differential equations (ODE)

mi v_ i t = ,mi i vi t + vp  + Fi fxtg + Ri (1)
t
x
_i
= vi ;
where in our model, the explicit systematic force Fi between the N particles was derived from the total potential
Eq. 2, stochastic force Ri was introduced to mimic the motion of solvent molecules on the solute, and xi , vi , mi , and
i are the position, velocity, atomic mass and friction coefficient, respectively. In general, the force Fi may depend on
the position of all particles, denoted by fx t g. Concerning the nature of the stochastic force Ri it is assumed to be
stationary, Markovian and Gaussian with zero mean and to
nor with the
have no correlation with initial velocities vi
systematic force Fi . The pulling speed vp is assumed to
be constant in time.



Figure 1. Czochralski crystal puller.

which the molecules are subject to various interaction potentials [5]. A basic technique is to model long-range attraction and short-range repulsion forces between pairs of
particles according to potentials of the Lennard-Jones type,
which lead to forces involving inverse powers of particle separation distance [6]. Recently Ishimaru, et al. [7]
demonstrated that in addition to crystal silicon it is possible
to simulate the amorphous and liquid state of pure silicon
with this type of potential by different heating and freezing
methods of melted silicon.
Small molecular models (up to 100 atoms) that may contain multiple types of atoms, can be created with a commercial quantum mechanics package called Gausian94 [8].
This package falls in to a group of ab initio methods when
very accurate molecular orbital calculations are carried out
for the entire structure with hydrogen termination. Unfortunately, no such system is available for larger molecular
models.
Section 2 of this paper introduces the molecular dynamic
approach to the simulation of material behavior. Here the
equation of motion of a particle system and the total potential energy based on repulsive and attractive forces is defined. Next the numerical implementation using finite differences and stochastic forces is discussed. The modeling
and visualization of simulated processes within a time interval is proposed in Section 3. Section 4 proposes the diagnostic techniques of simulated results consisting of multiple 2D graphs continually changing in time as the simulation proceeds. The last section demonstrates the modeling
technique applied on the Czochralski crystallization process

0

0

2.1. Total Potential Energy
A basic technique is to model attractive covalent and
short-range repulsion forces between pairs of particles according to total potentials. The total potential energy of a
system of N particles as proposed by Tersoff [6] is defined
as a sum of interatomic potentials:

 =

N
X
i

Ei ;

(2)

N
X

Ei = 21 fcrij  VR rij  , bij VA rij  ;
j6=i
where fc rij  is a cutoff function controlling the influence

of inter-atomic forces, written as

8

1

Rij
rij Sij
0
Sij :
The repulsive and attractive elements denoted by VR and
VA , respectively depend on particle pairs, while the function
bij includes particle triples in it’s expression. We used the
fcrij  = : 12 + 12 cos  Sr ,,RR
ij

ij

ij

ij

if rij
if Rij
if rij

Tersoff definitions

VR rij  = Aij exp,ij rij ;
VA rij = Bij exp,ij rij ;
bij = ij 1 + in ijn ,1=2n ;
i

i

i

ij =

N
X
k6=i;j

fc rij gijk ;

gijk  = 1 + c2i =d2i , c2i = d2i + hi , cos ijk 2 ;
where rij is internuclear distance between particles i and
j , and ijk is the bond angle between bonds ij and ik.
Following reference [9] the double indexed constants are
i j = , ij
i j = ,
defined as ij
Aij Ai Aj 1=2 , Bij Bi Bj 1=2 , Rij Ri Rj 1=2 ,
Si Sj 1=2 . All other parameters are constants
and Sij
reported by Tersoff [6] for silicon type of molecules, while
their suitability and limitations were delineated by Halicionglu [9]. Even though, the Tersoff originally derived his
potential for a crystal silicon, Ishimaru et al. [7] showed
that the Tersoff empirical inter-atomic can be adapted for
simulation of liquid and amorphous silicon as well. Thus,
the potential shown in Eq. 2 is sufficient for our purpose
to model the crystal growth form a liquid silicon consisting
of three states of silicon. The assumption is made that no
impurities are present in the silicon.

=

=  + 2
= 
= 


=  + 2
= 

the molecular simulation for a given simulation parameters
on a parallel workstation and calculate results for several
discrete time steps. Finally, the stored solutions can be displayed as a 3D model changing its shape in time while a set
of 2D diagnostic functions varying in time can help us to
understand the undergoing structural changes.
Each atom in the molecular structure is characterized by
five parameters: the atomic symbol, the van der Waals radius (a probability measure of the location of electrons), and
x, y, z cartesian coordinates in angstroms A . As usual,
atoms are represented as spheres, while bonds are drawn as
thin cylinders. We note that the number of atoms is constant
in time during our simulations. On the other hand, since
the presence of a bond between two atoms is determined
from automatically calculated threshold value, their appearance and disappearance are discontinuous in time. The view
point and the objects in a scene are changing their positions,
while the light sources are considered to be stationary.

2.2. Implementations
Numerical integrations of equation of motion, Eq. 2,
were performed under the constant volume within the cubic domain with periodic boundary conditions on side faces
and a reflection plane on bottom. At each time step the collision between the particle and the reflection plane is calculated to prevent particle from escaping out of the volume.
To simulate the dynamics of our models we provide the initial position x t0 ; x t,1 , and stochastic vector X,1 t ,
; : : : ; N . At
systematic force F t,1 of particle i for i
each subsequent time step t0 ; t1 ; : : : ; tn ; tn,1 ; : : :, we evaluate the current velocities, current systematic force, current
stochastic vector, and new positions using the explicit Gunsteren and Berendsed [10] stochastic approach. The integration method is of the third order and there is not necessity to
assume that systematic force Fi is constant during time interval t, because the method includes higher order terms.
We use the units kJ mole,1 (energy), u (atomic mass),
angstroms A ( ,10 m) (length), K (temperature), and
time is in ps units. The integration time step t and friction
ps and ps,1 in our
coefficient were usually set to :
simulations.

   
 

=1

 



10

0 002


5

3. Visualization
The data obtained from the molecular dynamic simulation can be visualized and processed by the diagnostic techniques. It is not possible at present to run the dynamic simulation in real time and to control the simulation and visualization parameters interactively. However, we can run

Figure 2. Radial distribution function for a)
crystalline silicon and b) amorphous silicon.

4. Diagnostic Techniques
Taking just the direct view of the atoms as shown in Figure 4, it is difficult to determine where the structure is still
crystalline but with some disorder. To analyze the different
crystal structures in more detail, we plot a time varying radial distribution function g r , bond angle distribution function g  , and static structure factors S k .
The radial distribution g r gives the probability of finding a pair of atoms a distance r apart, relative to the probability expected for a completely random distribution at the
same density. It can be calculated by averaging the number of atoms a given distance away from each atom in the
sample. The radial distribution function for a crystal differs
from that for an amorphous and liquid sample. Figure 2
shows the plot of g r for a crystalline and an amorphous
sample. The significant distinguishing feature is the absence of the third peak from Fig. 2a in the amorphous sample. To compare the simulation data with the available data










of neutron-diffraction measurements [7], the static structure
factors S k defined by Fourier transformation of g r are
used. In the bond angle distribution function g  , we count
the number of bond angles for a given angle from each triple
of atoms in the sample, see Fig. 3.







orient his view arbitrarily in the 3D environment while observing the pre-calculated molecular dynamics simulations.

6. Conclusion
Applying techniques from physics-based modeling and
molecular dynamics, we have illustrated an interactive virtual visualization tool for the simulation of material behavior at atomic level. Also, we have demonstrated the modeling technique of the crystallization process of liquid silicon
for large-scale systems. Implementation of multiple types
of atoms and their interactions in large-scale systems is under the current investigation.

7. Acknowledgment
Figure 3. Bond distribution function for an
amorphous silicon.

5. Results

9216

In the first example
Si atoms were initially placed
on the diamond lattice sites within the volume  
A 3 , ie. the tetrahedral prism. The entire volume was immersed in a heat bath with the fixed temperature distribution and pulled upwards in z direction for the simulation of
crystal growth. In Fig. 4, the pulling speed and temperature gradient were set to m=s and K=A, respectively.
The singly subscripted parameters such as i from Eq. 2
: eV
,
were set for a silicon molecule as follows: A
,1
,1
B
: eV , 
:
A ,
:
A ,
:  ,6, n
:
, c
:
 5,
d
: ,h , :
,R
: A, S
: A,
.
The second example, Figure 5, demonstrates the effect
of varying reference temperature. Initially, the cluster of
two oxygen atoms placed into a regular hexagonal lattice of
silicon atoms, Figures 5a, was heated at room and melting
temperature shown in Figures 5b and Figures 5c, respectively. The high disorder observed at melting temperature is
due to large stochastic forces applied to silicon atoms.
In the third example, Figure 6, we studied the oxygen
and silicon interactions. Here, two oxygen and Si atoms
were used in quantum mechanics simulation package Gaussian94, while the visualization and post-simulation diagnostics were done by proposed system. Figure 6 shows the sequence of images from dynamic visualization.
The proposed system implemented on HP9000/800
workstation gives the user choice of displaying all diagnostic variables plotted against time. The program lets the user

12

62 62 62

15

= 1830 8
= 471 18
= 2 4799
= 1 7322
= 1 1 10
= 0 78734 = 1 0039 10
= 16 217 = 0 59825 = 2 7
= 30
=1

37

The authors would like to thank K. Nishihira and M. Ishimaru for their collaboration during the course of this work.
This research was sponsored by grants from the Japanese
Society for the Promotion of Science Research for the Future Program in the Area of Atomic Scale Surface and Interface Dynamics under the project of “Dynamic Behaviour of
Silicon Atoms, Lattice Defects and Impurities near Silicon
Melt-crystal Interface”.

References
[1] S.M. Sze. Semiconductor devices: Physics and technology. John Wiley & Sons Press,New York, 1985.
[2] A. Witkin (Ed.). An introduction to physically based
modeling. Computer Graphics (SIGGRAPH ’94 Tutorials), Orlando, Florida, July, 1994.
[3] D. Terzopoulos and J. Platt and K. Fleischer. Heating
and Melting deformable models. The Journal of Visualizatoin and Computer Animation, 2:68–73, 1991.
[4] D. Greenspan. Discrete models. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, 1973.
[5] H.J.C. Berendsen and W.F. van Gunsteren. Molecular dynamics simulations: techniques and approaches.
In A.J. Barnes, W.J. Orville-Thomas and J. Yarwood
(eds). Molecular liquids dynamics and interactions. D.
Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland, 475–500, 1984.
[6] J. Tersoff. Modeling solid-state chemistry: Interatomic potentials for multicomponent systems. Physical Review B, 39(8):5566–5568, 1989.
[7] M. Ishimaru and S. Munetoh and T. Motooka. Generation of amorphous silicon structures by rapid quenching: A molecular-dynamics study. Physical Review B,
56(23):15133–15138, 1997.

Figure 4. An example of atomic arrangements in crystallization processes after simulation time of a)
300 ps and b) 600 ps.

Figure 5. Varying temperature. a) Initial cluster of silicon atoms. b) Cluster after 600 ps at room
temperature. c) The same initial cluster after 600 ps at melting temperature.

Figure 6. Oxygen and silicon interactions (SiO2 ). Two oxygen atoms are located at the center.

[8] Gaussian 94 Revision E.2. Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburgh,
PA, 1995.
[9] T. Halicioglu. Comparative study on energy and
structure-related properties for the (100) surface of SiC. Physical Review B, 51(11):7217–7223, 1995.
[10] W.F. van Gunsteren and H.J.C. Berendsen. Algorithms for brownian dynamics. Molecular Physics,
45(3):637–647, 1982.

