Old Theories, New Technologies: Cumulative Clutter Effects
Using Augmented Reality
A.W. Stedmon , R. S. Kalawsky±, K. Hill±, & C.A. Cook
Centre for Human Sciences, Defence Evaluation and Research Agency, UK
±
Advanced VR Research Centre, Loughborough University, UK
1
Author for correspondence: astedmon@mail.dera.gov.uk

Abstract
This
paper
investigates
human
cognitive
performance when information is presented via
Augmented Reality (AR) and overlaid upon a primary
display. Initial results support traditional experimental
paradigms of human memory [1] and comprehension of
information [2], and have been used to compare AR and
standard display formats when used in isolation.
Results from these experiments provide a fundamental
baseline for cognitive performance with a see-through
AR headset. Furthermore the results lay the foundations
for more comprehensive trials later in the research
programme when the display formats are combined to
provide a full AR facility. Consideration is given to the
specific effects of cumulative clutter and two
experiments are outlined that investigate the effects on
target identification. Although the data are still being
analysed, further consideration is given to key points
addressed in the experimental design. Details of a
dedicated website are provided where information will
be consolidated and provide a basis for developing
guidelines for the future development and application of
AR technology.

1: Introduction
The DERA Centre for Human Sciences (CHS) is
evaluating the potential of AR for providing operator
feedback in a future Advanced Embedded Training
(AET) system for the Royal Navy. Whilst the main
focus of the work addresses issues relating to embedded
training and on-line feedback provision [3], another
aspect of the research is concerned with investigating the
cognitive ergonomics of AR technology and human

information processing issues that may arise through its
use.
Although AR concepts have been around since the
1950s, the technology and its application is still in its
infancy. Indeed, research into the human factors issues
surrounding the use of AR systems is very limited and so
far no formal guidelines have been found for any
application of AR technology.
For the purposes of the research detailed in this
paper, AR is defined as supplementary visual
information overlaid on the real-world environment by
the use of a see-through head-set. Although this is by far
the most common definition of AR, ‘augmenting reality’
can be performed in a number of ways and through
various sensory mechanisms such as tactile and even
olfactory systems [4].
Within the present research programme at DERA, a
number of non-technical issues are being investigated,
focusing on potential psychological limitations of AR
technology. The difference between the majority of
existing AR applications and the research reported here,
is that the AR display is not being used to supplement
the conventional real-world environment, but to overlay
another visual display unit (VDU) to support Naval
tactical training and feedback provision. Overlaying one
synthetic image upon another, however, may exacerbate
any processing difficulties for the user, since the fusion
of two synthetic images may create an unacceptable
cognitive load. If the perceptual load placed upon the
user is too great, it is unlikely that AR will prove to be
an effective support to learning.
Trade-offs may
therefore need to be made between the complexity of the
primary visual environment and the amount of
information that can be provided by a supplementary AR
display. Of particular interest, therefore, are any
excessive human information processing demands which
may be associated with the use of AR.

This paper summarises the progress, to date, of work
carried out in association with the Advanced VR
Research Centre (AVRRC) at Loughborough University.
An experimental programme has been developed to
investigate issues of human cognitive processing in an
AR environment and particular attention is focused on
the effects of cumulative clutter between an AR and
primary display format.

2: Progress to date
A preliminary series of trials (Series 1) have been
carried out with four experiments to assess the viability
of an AR headset as display format. These experiments
have incorporated traditional experimental paradigms to
test out AR technology against a conventional VDU
format. Experiments 1.1 and 1.2 were based on
paradigms to test short-term memory (STM) and
comprehension of single text or graphics information,
based on the work of [1], [5] and [6], provided by either
an AR or a standard primary display format.
In addition a further trial was conducted (experiment
1.3) to investigate the comprehension and analysis of
simple prose [2], [7]; and learning effects for
hieroglyphics (experiment 1.4), [2].
These latter experiments were developed on the basis
that AR technology might be exploited to offer feedback
in a text based, simple sentence format or even perhaps
through the use of simple icons. The hieroglyphics
represented a real symbol set with which the participants
were unlikely to be familiar but could be assessed for
implicit meaning and learning effects throughout the
experimental trials.
This first series of experiments were conducted by
using the primary and AR display formats in isolation.
This provided baseline data for both AR and standard
display systems alone, before they were combined in a
full AR facility.
The overall results illustrated that there was no
significant difference between the performance scores
whether the stimuli were presented on a conventional
VDU or AR headset.
Further to these results, specific measures of memory
for text and graphics (experiments 1.1 and 1.2),
comprehension (experiment 1.3) and learning effects
(experiment 1.4) were analysed, and supported the
paradigms upon which they were tested. In addition
subjective measures were analysed and comparisons
across the sexes were carried out. A full account of
these results is presented in [8].
As there were no significant differences in the
performance scores between the display formats in these
initial trials, this laid important foundations for more
comprehensive trials which are due to be conducted later

in the research programme. Had significant differences
in the performance scores become apparent at this stage
then a more detailed investigation into why one display
format out-performed the other would need to have been
carried out. Furthermore, in such circumstances the
results could have had far reaching implications for the
design and use of AR systems in the future and their
impact on user cognition. What the results showed,
however, was that the AR display format performed as
well as a more conventional display format (i.e. VDU).
From the results of Series 1, a second series of
experiments was developed which concentrated on
cumulative clutter effects when the two display formats
were combined and overlaid in a true AR facility.

3: Cumulative clutter effects
The Series 2 experiments (2.1 and 2.2), detailed
below, build upon the findings of Series 1, combining
information presented on a primary display format
(VDU) and AR headset and setting it within a target
identification task to assess clutter effects.
In a training application, the use of an AR display
could introduce a number of undesirable effects that
could lead to a decrement in performance and training
effectiveness with the primary display. For instance, the
presence of additional visual stimuli, or clutter, on the
AR display may increase the difficulty of successfully
completing a visual search task on the primary display.
Alternatively, a high density of information on the
primary display may make it difficult to detect and
comprehend information presented on the AR display.
These experiments were designed to evaluate any
perceptual interference on the primary display caused by
information presented on the AR display. In order to
address these issues, it was necessary to vary a range of
display parameters that were expected to impair
performance on the primary display task, such as
obscuration and clutter effects caused by overlaying a
primary display with AR information.
Display clutter is the interference of information on a
display when too much information is presented at once
[9]. This may be caused by too much, or different types
of, information being presented at the same time, that
saturates the display and overwhelms the operator’s
cognitive abilities; or it may be that information is
presented or updated at such a rate that it overlays other
information, causing obscuration effects.
Although clutter can be controlled for with various
automatic and manual de-cluttering techniques, the AR
environment, by its very nature, assumes that synthetic
images can be overlaid over the real world to ‘augment’
the operator’s capabilities. At some point, however, this

augmentation may well prove to hinder, rather than help,
user performance.

4: Experiment 2.1
The aim of the first experiment was to determine the
extent to which clutter (non-targets) interfered with a
visual search task. This first set of trials was carried out
again using the display formats in isolation so that
comparative analyses could be carried out in experiment
2.2. As such, the task was performed either entirely on
the primary display (with the AR headset worn but
turned off) or entirely on the AR display (with the
primary display behind but turned off).
It was
hypothesised that the presence of additional visual
stimuli, or clutter, would increase the difficulty of
successfully completing a visual search task and also,
from the Series 1 data, that there would not be a
difference in performance between the primary and AR
display formats.
A dominant effect on search time is the number of
elements to be searched because the search is usually
serial and the more items to be scanned, the longer the
search time [10], [11].
The target identification task was a visual searching
task where a target had to be located amongst a group of
non-targets. Clutter, in the form of non-targets was
displayed in order to make the visual search task more
complex and relevant to monitoring tactical information
and searching for potential threats in a military role.

4.1: Participants
The same 16 participants were employed throughout
Series 1 and Series 2. This was done in order to
overcome any initial novelty effects caused by using the
AR head-set and to ensure that exposure to the AR
display progressed at a uniform rate. All participants
had normal, or corrected to normal, vision, and no prior
experience of AR. In addition, equal numbers of male
and female participants were employed so that the results
could be generalised for both sexes. All trials and
stimuli were counterbalanced to eliminate any
experimental artifacts or practice, learning or fatigue
effects.

4.2: Apparatus
Stimuli were generated using Microsoft PowerPoint
on standard PC hardware and the AR display was
provided by Virtual I-O ‘I-Glasses’ and Sony ‘Glasstron’
Systems operating in see-through mode.
Special
modifications to the optics on the Sony ‘Glasstron’

device were undertaken to increase the transmission of
primary display information through the head-set.
Without these modifications the primary display would
have been more difficult to see the primary display
through the AR head-set, and may have confounded the
experimental results.

4.3: Design
A mixed design was employed and three independent
variables were manipulated throughout the trials:
• display format with 2 levels: primary or AR;
• clutter density with 4 levels: 26, 52, 78 or 104
non-targets;
• target characteristics with 3 levels: colour, shape
and size.
Each of the target characteristics had three further
levels as shown in the table below.
Target

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Colour

RED

GREEN

BLUE

Shape

CIRCLE

TRIANGLE

DIAMOND

Size

SMALL

MEDIUM

LARGE

Table 1: Target Characteristics
The combination of target characteristics allowed for
27 discrete targets to be tested on each display format
and in each clutter condition. The mixed design allowed
for a within-subjects comparison of display format, and a
between-subjects comparison of density of clutter. The
design also allowed for comparison of target dimensions
in different levels of clutter and for different display
formats.
There were four levels of clutter with one target
stimulus item: low (26 non-targets), medium (52 nontargets), high (78 non-targets) and very high (104 nontargets). The dependent variables were the time taken to
locate the target correctly on the display and subjective
measures for display format preference.

4.4: Procedure
The participants were briefed on the overall aim of
the experiment and asked to sign a consent form. They

then underwent Baylie Lovie [12] optometric tests of
visual acuity to ensure that they all had normal, or
corrected to normal, 6/6 (20/20) vision.
Participants sat 1m in front of the primary display on
a fixed seat, in a normal sitting position, with the AR
headset fitted. Depending on the experimental condition
the AR display was either active or inactive, but still
worn at all times.
The participants were instructed that they would be
required to carry out a visual search task in which a
target was to be located amongst a group of non-targets.
A description of the target was given which matched the
characteristics of only one target shape on the display
amongst the clutter items.
When the participant had successfully located the
target they pressed the spacebar on the keyboard to stop
the timer. For each of the two display format levels
there were 108 trials and participants underwent the
same procedure for each.
At the end of each trial participants were presented
with their performance score indicating the number of
correct responses as a percentage across all trials and
their response times for detecting the target stimulus.
Before leaving the trials, participants filled out a
questionnaire detailing their subjective opinions about
the display formats, and were paid for their participation.

5: Experiment 2.2
The aim of this experiment was to determine to what
extent, if any, information displayed on the AR display
affected task performance on the primary display. It was
hypothesised that, apart from visual obscuration effects,
there would be a reduction in the performance of the
primary display task, indicated by either an increase in
the response time data and/or accuracy of target
detection.
This experiment followed the same design as
experiment 2.1. On this occasion, however, the primary
and AR display formats were combined to provide a true
AR facility in order to test the experimental hypothesis.
The participants were therefore instructed that the target
could be presented on either display, so both displays
had to be searched in order to perform the task.
The combinations of stimuli were set at two levels
which reflected the low (26 non-targets) and medium (52
non-targets) clutter levels in experiment 2.1. However,
by combining the displays the cumulative clutter total
represented the high level condition (78 non-targets) in
Experiment 2.1. Both levels of clutter were shown on
the AR and the primary displays as detailed in the table
below, with the target stimulus randomly presented on
either the primary display or the AR headset.

Condition

Primary

AR

Target

1

52

26

2

26

52

3

52

26

4

26

52

AR
Display
AR
Display
Primary
Display
Primary
Display

Table 2: Clutter Combinations and Display Formats

6: Discussion
At the time of going to print, the formal analyses of
the experimental data for 2.1 and 2.2 are due to be
carried out.
Experiment 2.1 data will provide the baseline
comparative data for experiment 2.2 and as such it is not
anticipated that there will be any significant differences
in the performance data between the two display formats.
Indeed, the data from the initial experiments of Series 1
would support this, illustrating that performance data for
the AR display format was not significantly different to a
conventional VDU format.
Based on the number of non-target items to be
searched in identifying the target stimulus, it is
anticipated that as the number of non-targets increases
performance data will show significant effects.
Response time is expected to increase significantly as the
clutter density increased and response accuracy may also
have suffered, as the clutter became more apparent.
Experiment 2.2 data offers the opportunity to
scrutinise performance in more detail. In this experiment
the performance data are not expected to be significantly
different from each other as all conditions represented a
cumulative total of high clutter density (78 non targets).
If any difference in the performance data exists then this
will be due to how the information was combined across
the two display formats and would highlight difficulties
in searching for targets on one display rather than
another. For example, searching a primary display
‘through’ AR clutter may be more difficult than
searching an AR display with primary display clutter,
because in the former case the information may have
been harder to discriminate.
From the combinations of information density on the
two display formats (as illustrated in Table 2) a simple
comparison can be made to investigate the cumulative
clutter effects. Experiment 2.2 data can be compared to
the high clutter density data (78 non-targets) in both the

primary display clutter and AR display clutter in
experiment 2.1. This will show if performance is either
enhanced or undermined through the use of AR overlaid
on a primary display. Furthermore the baseline data
from experiment 2.1, will also show to what extent
performance has been affected in the combined display
formats of experiment 2.2 by illustrating if this is
significantly different from the single display data.
Subjective data collected in these experiments will
also enable analyses and correlations of display format
preference and task performance to be carried out, as
well as attitudes to AR technology in general. It is
anticipated that participants might prefer the AR display
to the primary display as a medium for augmentation and
that this will be reflected in a significant relationship for
display type and performance, especially in later
experiments. However, it may also be found that aspects
of visual performance such as image accommodation and
image convergence may undermine the subjective
acceptance of AR technology. If this is the case, then
until these underlying technological issues are resolved,
the potential of AR may be limited.
Further analysis of the results will aim to determine
any relationship between objective performance
measures and subjective preference measures of the two
displays. Any correlations of particular attitudes the
participants had towards the AR display or conventional
VDU display may then have implications for how such
systems are implemented in the future and ultimately
combined.
A number of further human factors issues relating to
the use of AR technology and its impact in human
cognition are to be addressed in subsequent phases of
this programme. These will include: information content
and density; cognitive workload; attention effects;
symbology characteristics; and the overlaying of text and
graphics combinations.
In supporting the main DERA research programme,
the findings from these experiments will provide a
valuable insight into the fundamental cognitive
ergonomics of using AR technology. This research will
be used to support recommendations to be made to the
Royal Navy on the future use of AR in Advanced
Embedded Training systems.

7: AR website
As the potential of AR technology is being realised
and the technology becomes ever cheaper and
sophisticated, results from this research will underpin the
development of generic guidelines for the use of AR in
many other applications. Outside of the potential use for
AR technology in the military domain (for training,
simulation, and tactical decision support systems)
commercial and domestic sectors are already looking to

exploit AR technology by enhancing activities in
construction, maintenance, medicine, education and
entertainment. To this end, and so that information
regarding human factors issues of AR is freely available
and can be consolidated, a dedicated website is being
developed at the following site:
<http://sgi-hursk.lboro.ac.uk/~avrrc/AR.html>.

8: Acknowledgements
This work was carried out as part of Technology
Group 5 of the MoD Corporate Research Programme.
Any views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of DERA.
© British Crown Copyright 1999/DERA Published with
the permission of the Controller of Her Britannic
Majesty's Stationery Office.

9: References
[1] Miller, G.A. (1956). The Magical Number Seven, Plus or
Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing
Information. The Psychological Review, 63(2).
[2] Wickens, C.D. (1992). Engineering Psychology and
Human Performance. 2nd Edition. Harper Collins. New York.
[3] O’Shea, A., Cook, C.A., Young, A.L. (1999). Providing
On-line Feedback in an Advanced Training System: Initial
Work. Proceedings of Occupational Psychology Conference,
Blackpool 5-7 January, 1999.
[4] Croft, D., & Craig, I. (1998). Facilitating Inventiveness Context Orientation (Sense of Smell).
DERA Report,
DERA/CHS3/3.6/7/1.
[5] Paivio, A., Yuille J.C., and Madigan, S.A. (1968).
Concreteness, Imagery and Meaningfulness Values for 925
Nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology Monograph
Supplement, 76(1), part 2.

Dukes, W.F. & Bastion, J. (1966). Recall of
Abstract
and
Concrete
Words
Equated
on
Meaningfulness. Journal of verbal Learning and verbal
Behaviour,5, 455-458.

[6]

[7] Tinker, M.A. (1955). Prolonged Reading Tasks in

Visual Research. Journal of Applied Psychology, 39(6),
444-446.
[8] Stedmon, A.W., Hill, K. Kalawsky, R.S. & Cook.C.A. (in
print). Old Theories, New Technologies: Comprehension and
Retention Issues in Augmented Reality Systems.
In,

Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society, Texas, Sept 27-Oct 1, 1999.
[9] Stedmon, A.W. & Selcon, S.J. (1997). An Evaluation of
the Effectiveness of Alternative Launch Success Zone Formats
in Tactical Pilot Decision-Making.
In, D. Harris (Ed).
Engineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics – Vol. 1.
Ashgate, 1997.
[10] Drury, C.G., & Clement, M.R.. (1978). The Effect of
Area, Density and Number of Background Characters on
Visual Search. Human Factors. 20 (5), 597-602.
[11] Mocharnuk, J.B. (1978). Visual Target Acquisition and
Ocular Scanning Performance. Human Factors. 20(5), 611631.
[12] Bailey, I.L. & Lovie, J.E. (1976). New Design Principles
for Visual Acuity Letter Charts. American Journal Optom
Physiol Opt, 53, 740-745.

