“Merging Realities: Psychosocial Happenings--A World on Stage”
Tammy Knipp
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida

ABSTRACT

stage) would be factual (real) or illusional (virtual) is not
the issue. The important element is the mediated perceptions on the part of the performers in that their psychosocial and biological responses to the stimuli communicate a
sense of realism (or an implied truth). In other words, the
world on stage may be a truer representation of a technodriven reality--a reality from which we can not escape.

One of the virtues of our changing times is that new
media has challenged us to rethink and reexamine our basic
presumptions about reality and the reality that is virtually
perceived.
From the perspective of an electronic media artist, I
present a body of work (CASE STUDIES) of performativelike installations comprised of 3-D structures integrating
video imagery with the reality of the physical, psychological, virtual, and social worlds. These structures are instigators for enticing “social happenings” whereby participants and viewers become subjects from an observational
perspective, providing a simulated clinical “case study.”
With the influence of theoretical and scientific information
in the constructs of mediated environments, perceptions of
risk, danger trust, andself identity(s) are challenged. Using
a metaphor to that of a “world on stage,” the works provide a visual, conceptual, and concrete model to illustrate
“Progress from Theory to Practice.”

The Perspective of an Electronic Artist:
I am an electronic fine artist who uses new media to
create virtual environments (happenings). The works I produce investigate the psychosocial effects in the constructs
of techno-driven environments. I use technology to initiate
a communal exchange of reactions among both viewers and
participants, thus, providing a simulated clinical ‘case
study” through an observational perspective. This method
of collecting data from an observational view and constructing a phenomenological analysis is a practice
employed in the field of existentialism (a discipline of psychology whereby the investigator establishes validity by
describing and explicating a verbal report from observing
the subject’s behavior and perceptual experiences.)

Introduction:

In this essay, I reference two specific works of art (phenomenological reports): CASE STUDY 107 and CASE
STUDY 309. These works provide a visual, conceptual,
and concrete model to explore Progress from Theory to
Practice. Using a metaphor to that of a “world on stage,”
these case studies illustrate:

With the impact of technology on our lives, it is
becoming harder to distinguish between what is virtual,
what is fantasy, and what is considered to be real. Is reality
in a postmodern society becoming more like theater, a
techno-driven happening whereby our perceptions and
experiences are continuous states of illusion? In current
times, perhaps illusions are redefining our sense of reality.

1. Methods for blurring, both literally and perceptually,
the boundaries of multiple realities (i.e., the physical, the
psychological, and the virtual).

Metaphor: A World on Stage

2. Theoretical and scientific influences in the constructs
of virtual, mediated environments whereby perceptions of
trust, truth and self identity(s) are challenged.

In the theatrical arena if the concept of virtual reality
(what is illusional) references ametaphor to that of a “world
on stage,” the immersed performers would come to experience psychosocial effects among the physical, the virtual,
and the psychological realities. In effect, the biological and
emotional faculties of the performers on stage would come
to respond unconditionally to the mediated stimuli.
Whether or not the stimuli of the environment (a world on

O-7695-0210-5/99

$10.00 0 1999 IEEE

Defining and Positioning Terms:
In 1989, the term virtual reality (VR) was coined by
Jaron Lanier, a chief officer of a research company. Typically, VR (new media) references particular technological

413

a described scene. Researchers discovered that the subject’s blood flow increased to precisely those areas involved
in that of the “actual viewing.“[51 These studies imply that
when the subjects “mentally imagine a visual scene, [their]
eyes and brain act as if [they] were looking at the scene in
reality, correlating mental imagery to perceptual process.“@]
This same study suggests that the biological effects
(enforcing a sense of realism) induced by the power of
mental visualization, blur the boundaries between what is
virtual and what is real. Perhaps, what once claimed to be
an illusion has now come to be a “refashioned reality”--a
world on stage.

devices such as head-mount displays and motion-sensing
gloves that produce electronically simulated environments.[ll From a computer scientist’s perspective, VR is
“to foster in the viewer a sense of presence: the viewer
should forget that [he/] she is in fact wearing a computer
interface.“[*l
Author of the text Virtual Reality, Howard Rheingold
provides an alternative view ofVR, claiming that “the heart
of VR is an experience--the experience of being in a virtual world or remote location.“[‘l Sharing a similar view,
Jonathan Steuer in his article entitled “Defining Virtual
Reality: Dimensions Determining Telepresence” argues the
position of VR to be a “particular type of experience rather
than as a collection of hardware.“[dl These perspectives
shift the focus of virtual reality from a particular hardware
package to the perceptions of an individual in a mediated
environment. It is from this position of mediated perceptions that I draw a parallel to a postmodern, techno-driven
happening (a world on stage) whereby the boundaries of
the psychological, the physical and the virtual realities
merge.

Contemporary German philosopher Hans-Georg
Gadamer is referenced as stating that a “work of art requires
imaginative activity on the part of the observer.“[‘l I correlate “imaginative activity” with “mental imaging”
whereby perceptual and experiential realisms are framed
in a similar remote location to that of the cybernatural. Lisa
Blackman, author and lecturer on media and communications, references author and theorist S. Cubitt as coining
the term “cybernatural” and defining its discourse as when
“virtual space is viewed as a ‘third space’--a space existing
beyond those divisions and limits that currently position
subjects in the social world.“@] I would like to expand and
broaden “cybernatural,” as outlined by Cubit& to include a
position similar to that of a bird’s_eye / mind’s eye I mental
imaging perspective. I consider this “third space” to be a
fourth-dimensional remote location similar to the observational view inherent in the study of existentialism. The
video I kinetic case studies I will be referencing, provide
these remote, analytical perspectives and entice “imaginative activity” on the part of both the observer and participant. It is from these perspectives that the Progress from
Theory to Practice is explored.

A World on Stage: A Refashioned Reality
Theater and VR share a number of similar practices:
creating fantasy and illusive environments; altering perceptions; and, in some respects, attempting to immerse the
viewer. The typical objective of VR is to achieve “immediacy” whereby the presence of the medium is forgotten,
denied or hidden. In the context of entertainment, our logical intuition perceives virtual experiences to be the art of
divergence and illusion; thus, the altered perceptions can
be rationally and logically explained. However, outside the
realm of the arts, theater, and entertainment, if no mediation is perceptually detected, would the immersed fantasy
or illusive experience be a “real” or “virtual phenomenon”?

Psychosocial Realities: Level of Consciousness

I propose this question in support of studies conducted
in the area of mental imagery. Experiments have been conducted whereby patients were asked to mentally visualize

There are three described realities outlined by Max
Velmans, author and reader in psychology: the physical,
the psychological, and the virtual.[91 My focus addresses

1. Jonathan Steuer, “Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions Determining
Telepresence,” Journal of Communication 42, No. 4 (Fall 1992) p. 79.

5. Ann Marie Seward Bany, visual Inrelligence: Perception, Image, and
Manipulation in Visual Communicah’on (New York: State University of
New York Press, 1997) p. 86.

2. David Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin, Remediation: Understanding
New Media (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999) p, 22.

6. Ibid.

3. Ibid.

7. Gordon Graham, Philosophy of the Arts: An Inrroduction to Aesthetics
(London, New York: Routledge, 1998) p. 15.

4. Jonathan Steuer, “Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions Determining
Telepresence,” Journal of Communication 42, No. 4 (Fall 1992) p. 79.

8. Lisa Blackman, “Culture, Technology and Subjectivity,” in J. Wood
(ed.), The virtual Embodied (London, New York: Routledge, 1998) p. 133.
9. Max Vehnans, “Physical, Psychological and Virtual Realities,” in 3. Wood
(ed.), 7’he Virtual Embodied (London, New York: Routledge, 1998) p. 46.

414

the virtual, and the psychological) became inseparable,
undefinable, or invisible. In other words, what if the conscious mind could no longer distinguish between which
“identity and play” were to be performed in which reality;
and what if the “props” or mediated / unmediated imagery
shared the presence of all realities?

the level of consciousness (or the lack of) regarding the
perceived boundary framing these multilevel realities (the
physical, the psychological, and the virtual).
With selective types of VR whereby a head-mount is
worn, the obvious factor denoting the point of entrance and
exit from the simulated, mediated environment is the physicality of the hardware itself. Cumbersome hardware of
this nature provides a tangible, physical “thing” for claiming
a reality check; the hardware acts as a reminder, a conscious presence for differentiating the two experiential
worlds. A similar reality check is appropriated for the theatrical arena. For example, when a member of the audience steps on stage (equating a mediated environment) and
assumes a role with the aid of a physical, tangible costume
(equating a hardware component) and interacts with stage
props (equating simulated 3-D computer-generated
objects), several key elements provide a level of consciousness for the points of entrance and exit between the
two realities. These metaphorically shared distinctions
identify not only the characteristics of the media (VR and
theater) but also define the boundaries and parameters
framed by the two worlds and the environments each
medium creates.

Case Studies: Models and Methods by Which
Messages Shape Meaning
In the theatrical arena, omitting the perceptual barrier
that separates the viewing audience from center stage promotes psychosocial interplay. A cultural anthropologist
might say that without social interaction and human physical contact, we would lack social cognition and loose the
content that shapes meaning--meaning that derives from
body language and physiognomic characteristics based on
the interpretation of/interaction with others.
Communication expert John L. Locke, author of The
De-voicing of Society: Why We Don’t Talk to Each Other
Anymore, is credited with the notion that “human voice and
gesture provide constant feedback [immediacy].“ti*l
Philosopher and author Paul Ekman echoes Locke, stating
that “one important function of facial and other gestural
expressions of emotion is to communicate one’s inner states
to oneself and others.“tisl

In the above cited essay, Blackman references virtual
reality to be understood as “either providing the means to
enable greater freedom and autonomy (a place where one
can choose an identity and play away from the material
constraints of repressive society) or, in a more dystopian
fashion, as dissolving and fragmenting the ‘whole person’,
leading to greater alienation and estrangement from the self
and others.“[iOl The key phrase I wish to address here is:
‘A place where one can choose an identity and play.” In
the context of theater, the term “place” I equate with the
stage; the term “play” I equate with roleplaying, the multiple roles an actor embodies. Philosopher Kendall Walton,
who wrote Mimesis as Make-Believe, “develops and applies
the idea that many art works are what he calls ‘props’ in a
game of make-believe, and he finds the value of art rests
in the value of playing this game” according to Gordon
Graham.tiil

As an electronic artist, I seek a forum whereby technology facilitates or perhaps instigates a “social happening”
(a serendipity), encouraging elements of laughter and
humor as humanistic models for interactivity and play. My
works consist of 3-D video / kinetic sculpture installations
entitled CASE STUDI: each of which is assigned an identifying number. As previously noted, these works provide
a simulated clinical “case study”--an existential analysis.
Each CASE STUDY integrates diverse fields of study
that draw from models of research in areas such as: cognitive styles of the haptic (touch) /kinetic (motion) learner;
motivational, behavioral, and existential practices; perceptions of danger and risk hunger; social / kinetic language;
the psychology of humor and play; and research in the area
of selective optimum stimuli. CASE STUDY 107 and CASE
STUDY 309 (see Figure 1 and Figure 3) exemplify the
employment of these areas of research, as well as illustrate
psychosocial happenings among the multiple realities.

I expand the perspectives of both Blackman and Walton
to include the psychosocial effects that could, or would,
occur if the checkpoints between the realities (the physical,

10. Lisa Blackman, “Culture, Technology and Subjectivity,” in J. Wood
(ed.), The Krfual Embodied (London, New York: Routledge, 1998)
p. 132.

12. Jeff Minerd, “The Decline of Conversation,” The Futurist 33, No.2
(February 1999) p. 18.
13. Stephen Davies (ed.), Art and Its Messages: Meaning, Morality, and
Society (Penn State Press, 1997) p. 40.

I 1. Gordon Graham, Philosophy (?f the Arts: An Introduction to
Aesthetics (London, New York: Routledge, 1998) p. 17.

415

intimidated and self-conscious if the seating arrangement
is positioned back-to-back, versus face-to-face. Creating
appropriate personal space encourages participation while
enhancing the virtual / real experience.

CASE STUDY 107:
CASE STUDY 107 (Figure 1) consists of two chairs
bolted back-to-back, positioned directly under a suspended
cinder block. With the aid of four pulleys attached to the
ceiling, the cinder block is held in place by a 3/4-inch rope.
The rope leads to two black boxes that encase 19-inch color
video monitors. As illustrated in Figure 2, the objective is
to create an optical illusion, making it appear as though the
rope passes through to the underneath side of each black
box. The physical weight and gravity of the suspended
cinder block create an illusion (perception) of stress, tension and virtual danger--conversely, a “true” physical and
emotional risk.

3. Interfaces: Accessibility, timing, attention span,
and mental visualization
Chairs signify an invitation for seating. Metaphorically, the two chairs signify a hardware interface and the
two participants in the chairs signify a software interface.
The level of interactive accessibility in this piece was intuitively framed in that it did not include the technical complexity common in most VR systems. In other words, the
participants were not required to read a set of instructions,
point-and-click a hardware device, or be clothed with a
cumbersome hardware-wired system.

An eight-minute video segment displays a similar 3/4inch rope, which gradually unravels. As each strand of rope
breaks (video imagery), the cinder block overhead physically shakes. Simultaneously, the two chairs are jolted with
an electronic vibration--a shock.
CASE STUDY 107 revealed the following observations:
1. Diversion: Selective optimum stimuli
The bystanders (the arena of viewers, or audience)
appeared to believe that the people in the chairs were
jumping out of their seats in fear that the cinder block overhead would fall. In actuality, the jolting chairs caused the
unexpected stimulus-response. As in the art of theater, this
tactic (optimum selective stimuli of diverting the expected
with the unexpected) was used to maintain a level of novelty and arousal, as well as to alter expectations and perceptions of both participants and the audience. Through
the combination of real and virtual reality, the immediacy
provided each person the opportunity to encounter a peak
(immersed) experience.

Figure 1.

CASE STUDY 107,1997
Video/kinetic sculpture installation,
1O’H x 12’W x 6’D

Figure 2.

CASE STUDY 707 (detail view), 1997

2. Merging Multiple Realities: Center stage
CASE STUDY 107 merged the perceptual boundaries
of the physical, the psychological and the virtual reality.
The arena of viewers took on the role of performers. Their
participatory response gave additional meaning to the perception and interpretation of the mediated environment.
The shared presence of “center stage” (center stage references a central location where the realities interact and
merge) encompassed all of the individuals who were present.
If interactivity requires a center stage arena, people are
more likely to interact if the invitation accommodates two
or more participants (performers). The dialogue becomes,
“I’ll do it, if you do it.” Additionally, participants feel less

416

Pushing the envelope of patience and attention span in
linear time, the eight-minute video segment appeared to be
the breaking point in this piece. The video ended with a
very thin thread virtually appearing to hold the weight of
the cinder block. People proclaimed a disappointment the
rope didn’t break after waiting for the entire length of the
video segment. It seemed that the slightest possibility of
danger was the motive for capturing and maintaining the
attention span for the entire length of the “performance.”
This fascination supports Gadamer’s argument in that a
“work of art requires imaginative activity.“tt41 Interestingly,
the observation of the viewers and participants seemed to
included the imaginative activity and physical attraction to
the element of apparent danger. In other words, it appeared
the viewers were unconsciously drawn to the visual of the
cinder block falling on the two participants sitting in the
chairs, awaiting to see the experiential after-effects. Perhaps, this says something about our society--desires of risk
with a fascination for danger.

creeper. Other synchronized visual-audio, kinetic elements
are images of machinery parts that correspond to vibrating
motions of head-and-body massage units.
CASE STUDY 309 revealed the following observations:

1. Sensory Aaizptution: l’!ming, attention span,
accessibility and selective optimum stimuli
Sensory adaptation refers to a “decrease in sensory
response to a constant or unchanging stimulus.“tW As both
stations (structures) were visually identical in construction,
each provided different visuals corresponding to different

The enticing traits of risk and danger employed in
CASE STUDY 107 engaged and merged the psychological,
the physical, and the virtual reality, thus, challenging a sense
of trust, truth, and realism on the part of both the observer
and participant.

CASE STUDY 309:
Sharing similar characteristics with CASE STUDY 107,
CASE STUDY 309 (Figure 3) utilizes a personable language, such as kinesthesia (uniting physical sensations with
sound and imagery). The installation consists of two identical structures, each measuring 12 feet high, 4 feet wide,
and 4 feet deep. Once again, the invitation accommodates
viewing for two participants, each having an individual
zone. However, the viewing perspective (Figure 4) in this
installation requires the participants to lie on their backs (a
vulnerable position) on creepers and roll beneath a suspended two-foot square black box. The boxes (as in CASE
STUDY 107) encase 1Pinch video monitors. The objective is to synchronize the video imagery with that of physical kinetic sensations similar to CASE STUDY 107.
One of the towering structures depicts a video image
of a cement brick falling in the direction of the reclined
viewer. At the moment the brick breaks the glass (simulating the glass of the video screen), the black box (the 19inch video monitor) physically shakes. Similarly, a video
image displays an egg being dropped and removed by a
vacuum cleaner, at which time an actual vacuum cleaner
pulls the participant’s hair from the headboard of the
14. See Gordon Graham, Philosophy of the Arts: An Introduction to
Aesthetics (London, New York: Routledge, 1998) p. 15.

Figure 3.

CASE STUDY 309,1998
Video/kinetic sculpture installation,
12’H x 4’W x 4’D.

Figure 4.

CASE STUDY 309 (detail view), 1998

15. Dennis Coon, Essentials ofPsychology, 6th ed. (St. Paul, New York,
Los Angeles, San Francisco: West Publishing Company, 1994) p. 180.

417

physical sensations. The structures were purposely
designed to be identical as to challenge predictability (sensory adaptation) and to create a momentum of curiosity and
interaction between the two stations.

tronic artist who creates social interactive works. By raising
issues of belief and perceptions of trust, the demarcation
between virtual risk and real risk (virtual reality and reality)
breaks down.

Research indicates that an environment designed to
minimize stimulus input is not something humans generally seek out.lt61 Dr. Daniel Berlyne, a major figure in the
study of motivation, references four valuable traits for
research into stimulus selection: novelty, uncertainty, conflict, and complexity.tt71 By altering the viewing perspective (a non-traditional approach to viewing a work of art),
disorientation was a stimulus selection employed in CASE
STUDY 309, a method of enhancing the realism. Disorientation is defined as overwhelming or conflicting stimuli
that complicates the brain’s correlation of information. The
brain consequently sends false input to the various senses
whereby the altered perceptions are, in turn, experienced
as reality.ttsl

3. Merging Multiple Realities:
Psychosocial, multilevel interactivity
Similar to CASE STUDY 107, CASE STUDY 309 displayed multiple levels of psychosocial interactions, blurring the perceptual boundaries of the physical, the psychological, and the virtual realities. Both the on-stage participants and the implied offstage audience shared the presence of center stage.
Referencing Gadamer’s philosophy, the “mind” of the
art work (CASE STUDY 107 and 309) and the “mind” of
the audience must be mutually engaged in the creative
activity--“the work’s creativity needs its audience.“tt91 This
view is shared by author and philosopher R. G. Collingwood: “‘Art is not contemplation, it is action’ and the function of the audience is ‘not a merely receptive one, but collaborative’.“t*e) Collingwood rejects any “conception of
audience as passive spectator.“[2t)

The only way to view and experience CASE STUDY
309 was to place oneself in a vulnerable position. This disoriented position involved an element of risk with plausible
danger of the suspended video monitor falling. The
reclining position also included emotional risks of embarrassment and social consciousness. More importantly, the
enticing element which encouraged participation appeared
to be that of curiosity and the element of (perceived) physical danger.

Synopsis:

2. Risk Factor: The demarcation between virtual
risk and real risk

In both CASE STUDY 107 and 309, the sculptural contraptions took a life form all their own. The structures
became instigators for enticing and facilitating a “social
happening”--borrowing the term “happening” from Allan
Kaprow, artist and author OfAssemblage, Environments and
Happenings. Participants and viewers were unbeknownst
“subjects” from an observational perspective, a view
whereby human behavior, psychosocial responses, and
social interaction could be analyzed in real time. Both case
studies provided this analytical view (i.e., the cybernatural
/ an existential analysis) from which to observe the s u b jects in a mediated, techno-driven environment, one which
also encompassed multicultural diversity.

Galleries displaying CASE STUDY 309 requested a
signed release form from each participant stating the risks
involved and declining liability if a mishap occurred. Obviously, this added another dimension to techno-driven virtual environments, and raises many concerns for the elec-

Each case study invited participants and viewers to
exchange roles. The direct experience actually caused participants to become an even more knowledgeable viewer.
In other words, the haptic-kinetic experience began with a
curious viewer, changing into an active participant, then

16. Lyle E. Boume, Jr. and Bruce R. Ekstrand, Psychology: Ifs Principles
and Meanings, 2nd ed. (Halt, Rinehart and Winston, 1976) p. 206.

19. Gordon Graham, Philosophy of the Arts: An Introduction IO
Aesfhefics (London, New York: Routledge, 1998) p. 15.

17. D.E. Berlyne, Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity (New York, Toronto,
London: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1960) p. 18.

20. Ibid., p. 33.

The kinetic experience (video segment) lasted 90 seconds. The attention span in a reclining position appeared
to max between 60 to 90 seconds before the peak experience would have been lost to predictability (sensory adaptation). Timing, attention span, accessibility, and selective
optimum stimuli were all important elements of consideration in these interactive electronic works of art.

21. Ibid., p. 33.

18. Ronald D. Davis, The Gift ofDyslexia (Burlingame, CA: Ability
Workshop Press, 1994) pp. 18-19.

418

returning to the role of a viewer. This secondary viewing
leads to a more sophisticated observational role. It is from
this “haptic-experiential perspective” that the most selflearned meaning is constructed. These many perspectives
created an experiential embodiment (incarnation) of both
body and mind.

rience.” A peak experience, a term coined by Abraham
Maslow, is defined as the cognition of being, an ecstatic
moment, an awareness of the bodyPI
In CASE STUDY 107 and 309, peak experiences
embodied the cognition(s) of the being(s) -- the physical,
the psychological, and the virtual. The ability to produce
peak experiences by enticing the receptor sites was an
important factor. The stimulus-response heightened the
level of awareness of the body, providing a sense of truth
and realism on the part of the participants.

In both case studies, the following elements were points
of consideration for merging the constructs framed by each
reality:

Somesthetic Senses:
Haptic-ism:

Somesthetic is a combination of “soma,” meaning
body, and “esthetic,” which means “to feel.” Somesthetic
senses include the skin (touch), kinesthetic (receptors in
the physical body for detecting position and movement),
and vestibular senses (receptors in the inner ear for maintaining balance).t’“l

My self-generated definition, or description, of hapticism is akin to the somatic in which we learn principally
through the physical body itself. “Haptic” relates to touch;
“ism” defines a system, theory, practice, or action. I refer
to hapticism as experiential interactive art that utilizes
kinetic methods to produce a reality virtually perceived by
the haptic learner.

Research has discovered that “skin receptors produce
at least five different sensations: light touch, pressure, pain,
cold, and warmth. Altogether, the skin has about 200,000
nerve endings for temperature, 500,000 for touch and pressure, and 3 million for pain.“l2sl Because the body has more
nerve endings for the sensation of pain, the key stimuli in
both case studies was that of (implied) pain, engendered
by elements of perceived risk and danger.

In investigating the haptic learner (that is, one who
learns best by experience, utilizing and encompassing as
many of the senses as possible), I have discovered the importance of including the element of touch in virtual environments. It is through touch that we define meaning,
according to David Katz, a major figure in the study of the
psychology of perception. Katz states: “From a perceptual
viewpoint, we must give precedence to touch over all other
senses because its perceptions have the most compelling
character of reality. Touch plays a far greater role than do
the other senses in the development of belief in the reality
of the external world. . . What has been touched is the true
‘reality’ that leads to perceptions.“t2sl

The interesting phenomena is the “sense of truth” and
realism that results from creating an illusive virtual pain
versus real physical pain. The physical body reacts and
responds in a similar biological and physiological fashion,
whether or not the pain is physical or perceptually experienced. The brain triggers the release of a chemical called
beta-endorphin (similar to morphine) to combat pain.lz41
Receptor sites for endorphins are located in the same area
of the brain associated with pleasure, pain, and emotions.@-51
Researchers have concluded that “there is reason to believe
that pain and stress cause the release of endorphins. These
in turn induce feelings of pleasure or euphoria similar to
morphine intoxication.“1261 I conclude the physical and
emotional responses resulting from the (perceived / real)
stress and tension in both case studies caused these receptor
sites to release endorphins, thus producing a “peak expe-

Play Behavior:

22. Dennis Coon, Essentials ofPsychology, 6th ed. (St. Paul, New York,
Los Angeles, San Francisco: West Publishing Company, 1994) p. 177

27. See Abraham H. Maslow, The Farther Reaches of Human Nature
(New York: Penguin Group, 1971).

23. Ibid., p. 178.

28. Lester Krueger, The World of Touch (New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Publishers, 1989) p. 240.

Both CASE STUDY 107 and 309 challenged psychosocial issues such as social pretentiousness; embarrassment; insecurities; and emotional, guarded boundaries.
Therefore, it was important to maintain a light-hearted perspective, engendered by play in these mediated environments. This element of play was induced and promoted by
applying both visual and haptic I kinetic absurdities.

24. Ibid., p. 183.
25. Ibid., p. 183.
26. Ibid., p. 183.

419

ourselves in a cocoon of safety, comfort, and convenience
to the degree that we have become bored. Ralph Keyes,
author of “Chancing It: Why We Take Risks,” claims that
“we suffer from risk hunger.” He suggests people need to
take risks because our nervous systems and our bodies
demand the stimulation, that a little danger is good for
people. Taking risks brings us back to something primal
and original, relieving us from the tedium of everyday
life.tssl However, according to Keyes, the concept of risk,
becomes confusing if we define risk as a fear of loss. If
fear is amputated from danger then it becomes a Disney
ride--a leisure activity. Many people aren’t satisfied taking
risks unless something of value is at stake.[34)

According to Joseph Levy, a major figure in the study
of play, humor, and laughter states: “Play is necessary to
affirm our lives. When we slip into play, we slip into a
self-experience where we can afford to ‘let go’ and respond
to ourselves, to others, and to the environment in an unpredictable, personal way. Living in play means confirming
our existence and celebrating life.“[*9)

Humor:
Just as absurdities promoted play in each case study,
it was also important for play to promote the language of
humor--the ability to laugh at oneself and with others.
Patricia Keith-Spiegel, a researcher in the psychology
of humor, notes that there are four elements deemed by
many theorists as necessary (though not sufficient) to appropriate conditions for the experience of humor and laughter:
l
l
l
l

the
the
the
the

element
element
element
element

of
of
of
of

The definition of risk is subjective, as is peak experience. Paradoxically, what is most revealing may not be the
risks people take, but the ones they don’t take. For example,
for some individuals, the prospect of being rejected by
another poses a greater risk than engaging in an activity
like bungee jumping. Could virtual environments promote
an unemotional, risk-free society whereby the attachment
for objects and virtual identities govern human interaction
on the physical plane? Because of the emotional and psychological risks involved, will we become a culture that
lacks a social / kinetic language that builds on intuition
developed from the interpretation of gestures, expressions,
and body languages communicated in the physical reality’?
Locke warns: “‘De-voicing’ may cause both Westerners
and Easterners to become more isolated, distrustful, and
unhappy.“tssl

surprise
shock
suddenness
unexpectednesst301

With the use of bizarre video imagery, absurd kinetic
devices, and tactics that imply risk and danger, I was able
to produce these four elements in each case study. These
elements enticed (triggered) the release of endorphins, and
thus, created peak experiences for both the participant and
the audience. It was observed that humor was the communal reaction as a result of the combination of stimulus
and response, creating the appropriate conditions for social
interactions. This observation of communal laughter
reflects examples from anthropology, researched by Jacob
Levine, claiming: “There is nothing so completely shared
as laughter.“1311 Konrad Lorenz, one of three recipients to
share the Nobel prize for work on behavior, states:
“Laughter produces, simultaneously, a strong fellow feeling
among participants. . . . Heartily laughing together at the
same thing forms an immediate bond.“ts*)

If technological devices and trends progressively move
us away from social interaction in the physical sense, then
we may risk losing touch with our own presence. Then
again, our subconscious /conscious attraction to the “world
on stage” may be the primary objective so as to avoid the
emotional risk of being in touch with our own self-presence.

Conclusion:

Risk Hunger:

Art critic and author Timothy Druckrey states: “The
body is unquestionably the next frontier--the body, and then
cognition.“l361

An additional trait evident in both case studies was the
element of risk. Immersed in a technoculture, we wrap
29. Joseph Levy, Play Behavior (Toronto: John Wiley & Sons, 1978) p. I.

33. Joe Surgarman, “Chancing It: This Thing Called Risk,” College Park
8, No. 2 (Winter 1997) p. 16.

30. Jeffrey Goldstein and Paul McGhee, The Psychology of Humor:
Theoretical Perspectives & Empirical Issues (New York, London:
Academic Press, 1972) p. 9.

34. Ibid., p. 17
35. Jeff Minerd, “The Decline of Conversation,” The Futurist 33, No. 2
(February 1999) p. 18.

31. Jacob Levine, Motivation in Humor (New York: Atherton Press,
1969) p. 12.

36. Timothy Druckrey, “Introduction,” in Grentchen Bender and
Timothy Druckrey (eds.), Culture on The Brink: Ideologies of
Technology (Seattle: Bay Press, 1994) p.9.

32. Ibid.

420

Throughout this essay, I have discussed the invitation
of a “world on stage” to illustrate Progress from Theory to
Practice. I have provided the description of artistic exam-

provocative dialogue. Aside from a theoretical perspective, whichever reality in which we decide to engage, I sug-

gest that we maintain one important element: our sense of
humor--the ability to laugh at our multiple (mediated) selves
and with the multiple selves of others.

ples with scientific reasoning and applied tactics for
merging multilevel realities, while enticing critical and

Bibliographical References
1.

Barry, Ann Marie Seward. Visual Intelligence: Perception, Image, and Manipulation in Visual Communication. New York:
State University of New York Press, 1997.
Berlyne, D.E. Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1960.
Blackman, Lisa. “Culture, Technology and Subjectivity,” in Wood, J. (ed.). The Virtual Embodied. London: Routledge, 1998.
Bolter, David Jay and Grusin, Richard. Remediation: Understanding New Media, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press 1999.
Boume, Jr., Lyle E. and Ekstrand, Bruce R. Psychology: Its Principles and Meanings, 2nd. ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston. 1976.
Coon, Dennis. Essentials ofPsychology, 6th ed. St. Paul, New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco: West Publishing Co., 1994.
Davis, Ronald D. The Gif of Dyslexia. Burlingame, CA: Ability Workshop Press, 1994.
Davies, Stephen (ed.). Art and Its Messages: Meaning, Morality, and Society. Penn State Press, 1997.
Druckrey, Timothy. “Introduction, ” in Bender, Grentchen and Druckrey, Timothy (eds.). Culture on The Brink: Ideologies of
Technology. Seattle: Bay Press, 1994.

10. Goldstein, Jeffrey and McGhee, Paul. The Psychology of Humor: Theoretical Perspectives & Empirical Issues. New York,
London: Academic Press, 1972.
11. Graham, Gordon. Philosophy of the Arts: An Introduction to Aesthetics. London, New York: Routledge, 1998.
12. Hall, Calvin S., Lindzey, Gardner., Loehlin, John C., and Manosevitz, Martin. Introduction to Theories OfPersonality. New York
John Wiley & Sons, 1985.
13. Hjelle, Larry A. and Ziegler, Daniel J. Personality Theories, 2nd. ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1981.
14. Krueger, Lester. The World ofTouch. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1989.
15. Levine, Jacob. Motivation in Humor. New York: Atherton Press, 1969.
16. Levy, Joseph. Play Behavior. Toronto: John Wiley & Sons, 1978.
17. Maslow, Abraham, H. The Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York: Penguin Group, 1971.
18. Minerd, Jeff. ‘The Decline of Conversation,” The Futurist 33:2 (February 1999) pp. 18-19.
19. Steuer, Jonathan. “Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions Determining Telepresence,” Journal of Communication 4214
(Autumn 1992) pp. 73-91.
20. Surgarman, Joe. “Chancing It: This Thing Called Risk,” College Park 8:2 (Winter 1997) pp. 12-19.
21. Velmans, Max. “Physical, Psychological and Virtual Realities, ‘I in Wood, J. (ed.). The Virtual Embodied. London, New York:
Routledge, 1998.
22. Wilson, Colin. The Essential Colin Wilson. Berkeley, CA: Celestial Arts, 1986.

421

