A Role for VRML as a Multimedia Backbone in Interpreting
Cultural Heritage Sites.
John Counsell, Nada Brkl.jac
Faculty of the Built Environment
University of the West of England, Bristol. Frenchay Campus,
Coldharbour Lane, Bristol, BS 16 1 QY, U.K.
Abstract
This paper appraises the role of Virtual reality
modelling language (VRML) based 30 computer based
models of Historic Environments in increasing access for
and assisting the understanding of the general public. It
is argued that VRML based 30 models and linked media
create a low cost easy to use and intuitively accessible
interface through which transient or casual users can
retrieve information or experience narrative. The same
data collation and modelling process can also assist

conservation professionals in their tasks. Criteria are
discussed for determining when it is more appropriate to
model rather than use photographic techniques in the
light of the commonly expressedfear in conservation
circles that vicarious presentations may dominate genuine
historical experience. Developments are identified which
may assist in improving ease of use and understanding by
visitors on and off-site.

1: Introduction
Interpretation of heritage sites is seen as a specialised
form of education. Interpretation is revelation based upon
information, ‘not what you can do with history but what
history does to you’. [Barzun J]. The dimensions of
discovery are the ways by which we measure the world
around us, testing one against another. ‘Interpretation ’ is a
process involved in every dimension, and it is arguable
that it is not the communication process that we take it to
be, but the activity of opinion-making.’ [Machin A. 19861.
Heritage organisations perceive a need to entertain
visitors but at the same time to convince them of the value
of conservation of that heritage, to sustain the case for
conservation in the minds of the public who directly or
indirectly fund it. While originally cultural heritage sites
were shrines, needing no interpretation for their educated
or informed visitors, now that oral tradition has
diminished and there is not a preponderance of informed
fellow visitors, interpretation needs to be formalised.
[Freeman Tilden 19571
The question of when it is appropriate to model
instead of or in addition to experiencing first hand is
central to this paper. The Grand Canyon is cited in
support of the argument that some sites do not require any
visitor interpretation, (which does not however preclude
the need for informed professional understanding), and
that such interpretation is increasingly required the more
foreign the view is to the visitors’ experience. [HMSO
19751.

Fig l-Tower Model in VRML with Associated WWW Page
There is a perceptible tension currently between the
need to swiftly enlighten the diverse range of visitors to
cultural heritage sites and an increasing risk of
trivialisation. It is argued here that a digital spatial
information system is an effective way of organising and
accessing diverse data for which location is an important
aspect. Where the spatial information relates to a complex
three-dimensional structure a three-dimensional model
however abstract is created within the information system.
The group of potential users becomes increasingly wider
the more immediately recognisable and credible the
model appears. Transient or occasional users of such

115
O-7695-0210-5/99

$10.00 0 1999 IEEE

systems need an interface that is intuitive and easy to use
through which to retrieve information or experience a
narrative. It is argued that Multiple Media linked to
VRML 3D models takes a further step towards this goal.
(figures I & 2)

The Primary Interpretation identified above can be
further sub-divided between personal experience and
group activity. Personal experience involves examining
and comparing source data in order to gain new insights.
This is in many ways similar to the examination and
comparison of information from a variety of sources
which underpins the personal process of conceptual
design in buildings. If the data is digital but in diverse
formats and databases then a single unified interface will
ease that process. A group that is engaged in the same
process uses media in addition to support and record their
common understanding. This need becomes greater the
more asynchronous and less interactive the exchange
becomes. One example of this form of activity is in the
group project work undertaken in schools prior to and
following a visit to the actual site. Many heritage sites
now provide information and study packs for schools for
this purpose. It is significant that Historic Royal Palaces
for example have an education team and that at many
National Trust and English Heritage sites there is a room
set aside for on site project work with school parties with
props for study and role play.
There is now an increasing demand for the case-study
recording of the design and realisation process of building
projects in general which is similar to the Educational
aspect of Secondary Interpretation defined above. Such
recording is of paramount importance in the field of
conservation of historic buildings and environments to
guide and inform future conservation. The material gained
in this way can be interpreted to provide a detective story
narrative.
Washburne and Wagner argued that ‘visitors found
messages organised into comprehensive stories or
concepts tied together by central themes to be more
interesting than unrelated facts and identification of
objects.’ [Washburne RP & Wagner JA. 19721. Many
heritage sites now use museum staff members in historic
costumes to enact scenarios using genuine museum
artefacts or props to interpret family lifestyle, community
linkages and historic themes. Research indicates that
visitors learn and retain significantly more from
participating in this form of dramatic pageant. [Hayward
NG & Larkin JW. 19831.
There is a fear in conservation circles that this causes
the genuine historic evidence to become secondary to the
theatrical experience. For the Society for the Preservation
of Ancient Buildings (SPAB) their secretary wrote that
The Society doesn’t really get involved in questions of
interpretation and presentation, so we don’t have any
formal policies other than indirectly (e.g. that later layers
of history should not be destroyed merely to give access
to earlier ones etc; or where plaster has been removed
from a wall, revealing information about early masonry
construction, this should be recorded but plaster should
then be reapplied). Fairly obviously we don’t approve of

Fig 2 - Close Up of White Tower, Cupolas imported from
CAD, WWW page invoked by touch sensor mapped onto
Geometrv using Pavan within Mauinfo GIS.

2: Interpretation
Finch distinguishes between primary and secondary
levels of interpretation. Primary Interpretation is defined
as that of the conservator or archaeologist, the
professionals’ view, in order to reconstruct either
hypothetically (through drawings or models) or in 3D
actuality. Secondary Interpretation is defined as for the
edification or education of the public. [Finch JM. 19821.
Other professionals engaged with cultural heritage sites
also deploy Primary Interpretation to assist in their
understanding of the site. For example conservation
maintenance management is made more difficult by the
accelerated wear and tear exerted by the visitors who
partially or wholly fund it. Visitor management is used
and Visitor Centres are created to channel visitors away
from fragile and easily damaged areas. Visitor centres can
also convey a briefing or preparatory function. “Off-site
interpretation may or may not succeed in arousing in its
audience a wish to conserve an area but it will almost
certainly arouse a desire to go and see it.” [HMSO. 19751.
Sharpe for example further divides Secondary
Interpretation into either edification or education. [Sharpe
GW. 19761. Edification can be termed ‘sound-bytes’ for
capturing fleeting visitor interest, whereas education has
been defined as conservation education in more depth.
VRML Models may be particularly useful for off-site
interpretation.

116

consider people in our profile who have perceptual
problems then an analogue within the CAD system can be
used, with careful consideration, to present that part of the
building which cannot otherwise be perceived. ‘In any
event much of the understanding of any interior or piece
of environment has to be conveyed in words. I have to say
that a description of a cathedral by, say, Willis or le Due
are often brilliant analogues. It is almost inevitable that
words will have to accompany the visualisations and
auralisations... the words... could be transcribed into
signing alongside a picture or subtitles provided for the
deaf or hard of hearing.’ [Howell P. 19951. Other parts of
these sites are often temporarily or permanently closed to
the public. While Finch states that the public are as
interested in the process of restoration as in the restored
artefact itself, it is precisely during the process of
restoration that the site may be too vulnerable or too
unsafe to allow general access. [Finch JM. 19821. Equally
some parts of sites may not normally be accessible at all
to professionals either for similar reasons of health and
safety. In addition when carrying out maintenance or
repair it is necessary to consider the location of and the
risk to below ground or otherwise concealed remains.
Sites are large and those responsible for their care cannot
at all times experience them at first-hand, nor can all those
who wish to know more about them. The National Trust
for example owns over 900 properties. They define their
properties as fragile and beautiful and at the same time
physically and historically complex. This is described as
often making them hard for visitors to understand and
rendering much of the information about them difficult to
access. Archives and libraries are generally not available
to the public because they are so fragile. They have
sought various means using multimedia and visitor
centres to both overcome these barriers to access and to
convey a clear overview and sense of context to the
visitor prior to entering a maze of rooms and corridors.

the “restoration” of historic buildings to some earlier form
for educational purposes, and computers clearly have a
role. If we have any philosophy at all I suppose it is that
presentation should always be secondary to the historic
fabric, and that may well mean that important things of
interest will not be visible other than by photograph,
video, model etc.’ [Venning P. 19951. In fact much of the
interpretation of historic buildings and sites involves
drawing attention to hidden or inaccessible features where
modelling may greatly assist understanding.

3: Selection of Appropriate Media
Binks et al state that for non-specialist visitors the
aim is to give them an overall picture, to explain what is
happening, what is being revealed, and what its
significance is. For repeat visitors it is necessary to also
explain what has changed since the last visit. They add
that the interpretation will need to be presented at a
variety of depths. They suggest that themes and stories
presented in a logical sequence relating to route from the
human angle, which are participatory, which explain the
detective story, effectively provide living history for the
visitor. [Binks et al. 19881. Other research has also shown
that animated and interactive exhibits are more valuable
than static presentations. ‘Above-expected interest was
shown in the dynamic, animated, or changing
presentations represented by movies, changing lighting,
and audio sequences.... all the sequences with less-thanexpected interest involved flatwork, suggesting a greater
presentations’.
preference
for
three-dimensional
[Washburne RP & Wagner JA 19721. Sharpe uses this
research to argue that an interpretative audience prefers
those interpretative media which are most closely
associated with entertainment, and that the dichotomy of
education and entertainment parallels that of inertness and
animation. He also records that participation increases
retention and that multimedia is necessary to cater for a
variety of levels of information. Visitors in fact are
discouraged by reading while looking at objects and
prefer an audio commentary. [Sharpe GW. 19761. The
HMSO guide adds that the medium chosen to
communicate the message should avoid dominance of any
other media used, gain visitor interest and establish
rapport. They also endorse interactive participation as
particularly important for younger children and advocate
self-paced material that enables an appropriate pace for
the casual visitor. They define the task as helping visitors
to ‘imagine accurately’ while producing a conservationist
response. They infer that the chosen approach should
obtain feedback by testing the recall of the visitor and that
a conservationist response is produced. [HMSO. 197.51.
While firsthand experience of parts of heritage sites is
possible for many visitors there are problems of access for
the disabled and the elderly. Howell argues that if we

4: Tasks which may be supported by a model
It is necessary to distinguish between those
conservation tasks that relate directly to preservation of
the fabric and those that a model might equally well
support. It is also necessary to determine when
photographic images will serve and when only a model
will perform the necessary tasks, (although arguably
VRML can be used to integrate both 3D model and
photograph in one environment).
Finch classifies seven cases of increasing intervention
in heritage sites. [Finch JM, 19821. Preservation is the
first, which may only involve restraint rather than any
direct action. The second, restoration, restores a previous
condition. The third, conservation and consolidation,
involves using new materials and tools, whereas the

117

Equally the understanding gained from Primary
Interpretation needs to be shared between professionals
working within conservation. The physical and historical
complexity of heritage sites is held to be better modelled
in 3D than 2D to ensure commonality of understanding
between all those engaged in its care. WWW Browsers
and VRML plug-ins are affordable and accessible from all
desktops. VRML 97 is now an IS0 Standard and a useful
non-proprietary neutral 3D format in which to record
information about the hidden or inaccessible parts of
heritage sites.
Further work is necessary to enable all these
aspirations to be met by digital modelling. Thompson
argues that “The best basis for understanding a ruin is
therefore a wide knowledge of other structures of the
same period, whether ruined or not, since the mind is
consciously or unconsciously making comparisons, and
the larger the stock on which it is possible to draw, the
more reliable the result is likely to be.” [Thompson MW,
19811. This broad understanding can only be gained
asynchronously by first hand experience at present.
Linked digital models could well improve this process.
For this to be effective a critical mass of heritage sites
need to become available which meet the same standards
and support the same classification systems so that they
can be interactively linked and browsed to provide this
broad understanding. Similar significant elements need to
be classified similarly so that they can be inter-linked.
Standards for scale of model and matching levels of detail
need to be agreed and established.
Sharpe stated that “in early writings there was an
element of interpretation when the writer passed on his or
her impressions or observations to the recipient, the
reader, who may never have been near the feature being
interpreted. In present day interpretation we work more
closely with the feature itself, are in direct contact with
the recipient, and have a variety of media to rely on.“.
[Sharpe GW. 19761. This direct contact of the guide with
the recipient would not apply so readily to a digital model.
Yet it may also be of interest to compare the views of
such as Pevsner with those of others who do not agree. A
WWW based digital model could support a palimpsest of
commentaries linked together. Different representations
and commentary trails can be mapped onto the same
model of the cultural heritage site, in a similar manner to
mapping shifting political boundaries onto a less mutable
physical relief map. To serve such data in the most
flexible way development is needed to supply not just
WWW pages on demand but frames on demand which
show the requested contrasting views.
Other recent research at UWE based upon the handson science exhibits at the Bristol Exploratory has been
testing cellular phone and active badge based means of
delivering context sensitive audio commentary to visitors
using the interactive exhibits. [Heard P et al, ESS Faculty,

fourth, reconstitution, consists of partial re-building using
traditional materials and skills. The fifth is adaptive reuse, such as placing a new roof on a ruin in order to use it
in a way it was not used originally. In the five cases above
the significant elements remain. Therefore photographs,
digital images or 3D scans may serve for ‘off-site’
interpretation. A digital model would similarly serve as an
adjunct in the same sense as a visitor centre acts in a
preparatory or briefing role. It would however also enable
concealed aspects to be demonstrated and act as one
interface to the process of maintaining and accessing
records relating to the site. Case six consists of
reconstruction, of vanished buildings by creation of a
surrogate in the original context. It is noteworthy that the
‘first-rate’ building is more likely to be preserved than the
‘sixth-rate’ buildings that may have formed its original
setting.
The Museum of London Archaeological Service use
3D CAD to understand and extrapolate from the
excavated portions of sites such as London’s Roman
Amphitheatre, to model their interpretation of the
complete original structure, thereby recreating buildings
or forms that no longer exist. [MOLAS 199.51. Case seven
is replication, the creation of a duplicate, which coexists
with the original, often for reasons of the fragile nature of
the original. In both reconstruction and replication a
model is built, which may or may not be full size and as
fully detailed as the original, depending on the need. With
accelerating use of the WWW it is increasingly used for
narrative using a mix of media, for interaction, for testing
recall, for monitoring user reactions and providing a
context sensitive response. Now that Virtual Reality (VR)
is increasingly technically possible it is possible to
consider a digital alternative to a physical model, which
can also serve the information needs expressed above.
Such has happened with first the creation of Lascaux II as
a full-size physical model of the original cave system
which has been followed by the more recent scanning and
modelling of a VR version showing bitmap images of the
prehistoric cave paintings in interactive context.

5: Further Development
This paper argues that the perceived advantages of
VRML for construction in general are equally applicable
to heritage sites and that additional value can be obtained,
because of the special nature of heritage sites and the need
for interpretation. VRML is a useful adjunct to firsthand
experience for Secondary Interpretation, providing a
multi-layered capacity for both edification and
conservation education. While the attention span of the
visitor to the heritage site or visitor centre may be fleeting
this does not necessarily apply to a remotely accessed
digital model with related information. Such a model may
be explored at a variety of levels of understanding.

118

UWE]. There is scope for considering portable versions of
some of the information held which could be delivered in
this manner as a direct complement to first-hand
experience. The Digital model would in this sense become
one easily used point of access to a digital archive, an
integrative repository from which such information is
served. There is a need for an improved feedback tool that
monitors use and amends delivery to suit the individual.
An interactive system is potentially capable of doing so
and one aspect of the use of active badges at the
Exploratory is to cue the system to deliver material
appropriate to the object of focus and the length of time
spent examining it.

visitors. More work is required on tools and server
applications. Tools are required that enable the interactive
explanation to be developed into a script or storyboard for
a narrative, while retaining multi-level links through casestudies to primary source data. Server applications are
required that serve on-demand frames of associated
VRML and WWW pages.

Acknowledgements
This work has been partly funded through the
National Creative Technology Initiative of the ESRC in
the UK.

6: Conclusion

References

Provided that it is widely available on the WWW and
readily updated the model can serve as an off-site
preparatory and briefing tool. One particular s u ch need is
to improve accessibility for the handicapped, permitting
them to explore a model in order to plan an accessible
route to points of interest, and where this is not possible to
at least vicariously experience the otherwise inaccessible.
However such a model does not have to be complete in all
respects to be useful. It may suffice to model either the
most significant points to meet visitor interpretation
needs, or to model on a project specific basis over time,
which would build from one case study to the next. Either
would lead to building a comprehensive model through
accretion. Standards would need to be defined to enable a
grid of different levels of detail focusing on areas of
interest, while still giving an overview and a context for
the remainder.
WWW Browsers can be used to deliver interactive
linked multimedia showing historic environments. This is
capable of arrangement on demand to suit the diverse
retrieval requirements of the professional. It is also
capable of being of use to the professional in explaining
interactively to colleagues o r f o r r e c o r d i n g t h a t
explanation to form the basis of an edited narrative for

Jean Barzun auoted bv Freeman Tilden. ‘lnteroretinn our
Heritage’, University of N. Carolina Press 1957.
’
Machin A. 1986,‘Changing the Viewpoint’ in Heritage
Interpretation, 1986, Winter 34, pp 4-5.
Freeman Tilden, 1957. ‘Interpreting our Heritage’, University of
N. Carolina Press.
HMSO 1975. ‘Guide to Countryside Interpretation Part I,
P r i n c i p l e s o f Countryside Interoretation and Interpretative
Plan&g’, published by HMSO. ’
Finch JM, 1982.Curatorial Management of the Built World’,
McGraw Hill.
Sharpe GW, (Ed). 1976. Interpreting the Environment’, J Wiley
& Sons inc.
Washbume RP & Wagner JA, 1972. Evaluating Visitor
Response to Exhibit Content’ in Curator 1972, XV 3 pp 24%
254).
H a y w a r d NC, Larkin J W , 1983. Evaluating Visitor
Exneriences...‘in Museum Studies Journal 1983 Fall 1 2.
Veining P, 1995, Secretary to the SPAB, in letter to the author.
MOLAS. 1995. The Museum of London Archaeological Service
Annual Report for 1994.
Thompson MW, 1981, Ruins, their preservation and display’,
British Museum Press.
Binks G, Dyke J, Dagnall P, 1988, ‘Visitors Welcome, A
Manual on the Presentation and Interpretation of Archaeological
Excavations’. oublished bv HMSO.
Howell P, 1995, Percepiion, Disability and the Conservation
Element’, in Journal of Architectural Conservation, No 2 July
1995 pp 63-77.
[Heard Pet al, ESS Faculty, UWE].

119

