Generation of Passion Images from “Tanka” Poems
based on the Synesthesia Phenomenon
Tsutomu Miyasato
ATR Media Integration & Communications Research Laboratories
2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan
Tel. +81 774-95-1490, Fax.+81 774-95-1408, E-mail: miyasato@mic.atr.co.jp

Abstract
This paper describes an investigation of the generation of
surrealistic spaces that aim to achieve a new communications environment in which people can mutually convey their
thoughts, mental images, and passions. Passion images here
can be compared with conceptual images in the analogy of
“logos versus pathos.” Our focus was on the phenomenon
of synesthesia, and the results shown are of the testing of
color image creation involving “tanka” (i.e., 31-syllable
Japanese poems), aiming at the generation of images where
some passions are reflected rather than concrete scenes imagined from word meanings. In addition, this paper proposes
an application that judges the similarity of pieces of music,
showing the possibility of making instant, subjective judgements without need for a performance.

1. Introduction
The authors are progressing with research on a technology to create new communication environments and methods to overcome present communications limitations by applying virtual reality, for the purpose of allowing people to
mutually convey their thoughts, mental images, and emotions more effectively [1-2].
Human recognition and human communications are
classified as being either logical or emotional. In this paper
we explain an investigation on the generation of passion images focusing on the synesthesia phenomenon. Passion images here are compared with conceptual images [2] in the
analogy of “logos vs. pathos.”

2. Synesthesia Phenomenon
Expressions involving the sense of sight are often used
to express sounds, in what is called “colored hearing.” The
painter Wassily Kandinsky was said to possess synesthesia
[3]. It has been said that when he viewed some colors, these
colors would also become audible. In addition, the French
poet Arthur Rimbaud made a poem relating images (evoking

vowels under the theme called “Voyelles”) to colors [4].
Synesthesia, besides being reactions belonging to a system of senses in the case of stimulation being given to the
receptors of the senses, denotes a phenomenon that causes
reactions to senses belonging to a system originally excluding the above senses [5]. One example of this is the phenomenon of hearing a sound and feeling a color known as
“colored hearing.” Yellow is usually assigned to the sound
of a child’s voice.

3. Generation of Passion Images by Media Exchange
People possessing typical senses find it difficult to understand the phenomenon of synesthesia. We, who possess
typical senses, are merely able to enjoy pictures as media
while mixing their own past experiences generated by images for sight stimulation and acoustics effects for hearing
stimulation. However, what kind of world do people with
synesthesia perceive?
Imagining the world that people with synesthesia perceive,
we investigated the generation of images. We focused on
poems. Relationships are said to be strong among colors,
sounds, and feelings. We then tested color image creation
from the Japanese “tanka” poems of Ogura Hyakunin Isshu*,
which were written with 31 Japanese syllables. However,
this is not about the correspondence of simple sounds and
colors, it is not like the flashback of concrete scenes like
Fig.1 imagined from the meanings of the words of the poems. Our goal is to generate images so that passions are
reflected.
We generated passion images from Japanese poems using the following steps.
Step 1: A table was created beforehand of the corresponding relationships between phonemes and colors. For ex* “Ogura Hyakunin Isshu” is an anthology of 100 poems by 100 different
poets. The poems are all "tanka." "Tanka" consist of five lines with a
total of 31 syllables in the syllabic pattern of 5-7-5-7-7. They originated
in the thirteenth century.

ample, the vowel “i” is made to correspond to red, the
vowel “a” is made to correspond to black, etc. In addition, for differences in the sounds of voiced consonants
and so on, correspondences are made to differences in
brightness. Here, the correspondence relationships between phonemes and colors have been determined by the
senses of the authors themselves, because “there is no natural correspondence between colors and sounds” [6].
Step 2: The phonemes that compose 31-syllable Japanese
poems were made to correspond to image elements, and a

Figure 1. Example of a scene imagined from a poem.
Image courtesy of Soseki (http://mall.ec.infoweb.ne.jp/korokan/

multidimensional image element array was constructed.
In this paper, we took a two-dimensional array so that the
image became rectangular, i.e., a square matrix. The image elements corresponding to the phonemes by the time
series of the reading, were colored in the direction from
the upper left to the right in the two-dimensional array.
Here, in the case of image elements emerging without color
information being given (unless the total number of image elements is the square count), the color white is allocated. After that, various types of image processing (of
low-pass filtering and so on) were carried out and displayed.
In Fig. 2, two results are shown from carrying out the
above-mentioned color image creation processing to the
“tanka” poems by two poets from the Ogura Hyakunin Isshu.
The same method can be applied to music. For example,
if a quarter musical note is the shortest musical note in a
musical score, it can be made to correspond to image elements as the shortest part of the score. Even if there are
differences in the scores, it is common for pieces of music to
resemble each other. Any judgment on similarity therefore
depends on human judgment. With color images, the comparative ability is high, and even people who can not read
complex musical scores are able to feel the similarities without the need for a musical performance. Figure 3 shows an
example of a picture converted from a musical score ofa song
titled “cosmos.”

tanka/index.htm)

Figure 2. Example of color image creation from the Japanese“tanka” poems of Ogura Hyakunin Isshu.
No . 9 poem by Lady Ono no Komachi

No. 61 poem by Lady Ise no Osuke

Color of the flower
Has already faded away,
While in idle thoughts
My life passes vainly by,
As I watch the long rains fall.

Eight-fold cherry flowers
That at Nara--ancient seat
Of our state--have bloomed,
In our nine-fold palace court
Shed their sweet perfume today.

Use of this English translation is permitted by the University of Virginia Library the Japanese Text Initiative, http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/
japanese/hyakunin.

4. Conclusion
We explained our investigation on the generation of surrealistic images aiming at the achievement of a new communications environment for people. This time, color correspondence was performed with phoneme units involving
“tanka,” but we are also considering investigations on color
correspondence with word units (such as seasonal words)
and on the reflection of the peculiarities of every songbook
or every poet focusing on the similarity of the method of
expression.

References
[1] J. Satoh, H. Noma and T. Miyasato, T., “Emotional Virtual Environment”, Iasted International Conference on Computer
Graphics and Imaging (CGIM'98), pp. 245-248 (Jun 1998).
[2] H. Noma, Y. Sumi, T. Miyasato and K. Mase, “Thinking Support System via a Haptic Interface” [in Japanese], 13th Human
Interface Symposium, pp. 1 - 16 (1998).
[3] F. Whitford , “Abstract Art Guide” [ T. Kinoshita (translation in
Japnanese], Bijutsu Publishing, (Oct. 1991).
[4] D. Horiguchi, “Rimbaud Anthology” [translated in Japanese],
Shinchou Press, (Oct. 1951).
[5] T. Oyama, S. Imai, and T. Wake , “Sense and Perception Psychology Handbook” [in Japanese], Seishin Shobou Press, (Jan.
1994).
[6] K. Gelstern , “Color and Form, Chapter 9, Correspondence” [
K. Abe (translation in Japanese)], Asakura Press, (July 1989).

Figure 3. Example of a picture converted from a
musical score of a song titled “cosmos” by Sada
Masashi.

