Visual Intelligence Turning Data into Knowledge
Mikael Jern
Advanced Visual Systems Denmark

ABSTRACT
In an intensely competitive global business environment, companies compete for advantage
on many fronts, including the area of information technology. Companies that exploit their
business data effectively can gain important insight into markets, and respond to the
constantly changing needs of customers. Consider how often business data is generated:
every time we make a credit card purchase, use a mobile telephone, and conduct many other
of our daily tasks, potentially valuable data is created. Data is both plentiful and available. The
challenge, and the opportunity for creating competitive advantage, is successfully identifying
relevant information in massive repositories of raw, transactional data. In the information age,
lack of data is rarely a problem.
In contrast, it is increasingly common to encounter problems for which all the necessary data
is potentially available to make a complete assessment of the risks, and hence to reach an
optimum solution. Mapping the data through to timely, quality decisions has never been
harder.
Answering the call is a new realm of data exploration tools called Visual Intelligence. This is
a process that provides revolutionary technology to address the challenge of discovering and
exploiting information. For innovative companies, powerful Visual Intelligence applications are
improving their decision-makingcapabilities by performing spatial and multivariate visual data
analysis and providing rapid access to comprehensible information. This paper examines the
issue faced by most business - how to turn data into powerful business knowledge, and make
this knowledge accessible to persons who rely on it. The role of Information Visualization
techniques and the Visual User Interface in the overall Visual Intelligence process is
assessed.
The Visual Intelligence tools introduce a brand new opportunity for decision-makers. It brings
open and customizable visual data mining tools to their desktop. Advanced visualization
methods provide an easy to use and economic way to build qualitative knowledge.
The integration of Data Warehousing, Information Visualization, Web and new Visual
Interaction techniques will change and expand the paradigms of current work of humans
using computers. Visual Intelligence will improve visual communication that takes place in all
elements of the user interface and provide decreased time-to-enlightenment.

VISUAL INTELLIGENCE - TURNING DATA INTO KNOWLEDGE
Mikael Jern
Advanced Visual Systems and Linkoping University
E-mail: mikael@avs.dk
The first challenge is locating and retrieving the
relevant data, from a data world which is
growing in size, but is also declining in average
information content.. Our ability, however, to
consume information is largely unchanged. Tools
will be required to navigate efficiently to retrieve
specific data, to explore data surrounding a topic
of general interest, and effortlessly browse the
wider data world.

ABSTRACT
Visual Intelligence is a process that provides
information visualization technology to address
the challenge of discovering and exploiting
information. For innovative companies, Visual
Intelligence applications are improving their
decision-making capabilities by performing
spatial and multivariate visual data analysis and
providing rapid access to comprehensible
information. This paper examines the issue faced
by most business - how to turn data into
understandable business knowledge, and make
this knowledge accessible to persons who rely on
it. The role of information visualization
techniques and the Visual User Interface (VUI) in
the overall Visual Intelligence process is
assessed.

The second challenge is understanding the
complexity, i.e. the conversion of appropriate data
to relevant information. This can be achieved by
maintaining a high level of human involvement
and participation in the processing and analysis
of data through visual interaction with the data
analysis process. Information visualization
retains our involvement and understanding, and
ensures that we do not generate abstract solutions
that are divorced from the original problem.
Consider the simple example of regression
analysis to fit a straight line. Seeing the points
and regression line in the same graph provides an
immediate understanding of the process. We can
easily spot weaknesses in the interpretation.

The integration of Data Warehousing,
Information Visualization, Web and new Visual
Interaction techniques will change and expand
the paradigms of current work of humans using
computers. Visual Intelligence will improve
visual communication that takes place in all
elements of the user interface and provide
decreased “time-to-enlightenment”.

The third challenge of information visualization
techniques is to find interj-aces and display
formats that maximize information content in
applications without introducing corresponding
levels of application complexity. Visual tools, in
addition to representing information, can act to
simplify an application’s user interface, and by so
doing, contribute to the application’s acceptance
on the business desktop.

CHALLENGES
The evolution in information visualization is
presenting many technological challenges, but
perhaps the greatest challenge is in retaining the
intimate involvement and understanding of the
end user. The traditional interfaces of mouse,
keyboard and screens of text allow us to work on
the desktop computer, while information
visualization truly enables us to work with the
desktop computer. There are major challenges in
providing the perfect information visualization
tools that will change and expand the paradigms
of current work of humans using computers.

The fourth challenge is in effectively
communication a vision, such that it is accurately
shared and understood by a wider and less
specialist audience. Web-based information
visualization tools will provide solutions.
Although advanced data mining techniques are
available, they often appear as inaccessible

0-7695-0210-5/99
$10.00 0 1999 IEEE

3

mining process. These tools must comply with an
industry-standard architecture, such as
DCOM/ActiveX or Java.

“black box” solutions with a poor user interface
and cannot be changed by the users. The final
challenge is to provide “open” and
“customizuble” visualization tools to better
integrate the visual user interface with the data

VISUAL 1NTELLIGENCE

Figure I : Conversion of data to informed decisions and shared knowledge in the overall Visual
Intelligence process provided by a set of Tasks (circles).

Important features of the Visual Intelligence Process:
1 . Full integration with the data warehouse or spreadsheet process by which data is brought
together and stored in a multidimensional data structure.
2. A set of Information Visualization tasks which may be undertaken by the user.
3. Different categories of users who impose different goals on the process.
4. Visual User Interface layer with support for both local and network interaction - “Thin” and
“Fat” client scenarios.
5. Web-based component architecture (DCOWActiveX or Java).
6. Tight integration between data and visualization supporting “drill-down’’ features.
7. Customizable and user friendly solutions instead of inaccessible “black boxes”
8. Sharing of increased knowledge though better “communication” tools
people are good at (Knowledge, Experience).
The overall objective of visual communication
that takes place in all phases of a Visual
Intelligence process is to provide decreased
“time-to-enlightenment”.

ROLE FOR VISUALIZATION
The fundamental purpose of any visualization is
to communicate information to users.
Visualization sits at the interface between what
machines are good at (data information) and what

4

Visualization is the glue within the Visual
Intelligence process and the user will be able to
navigate within this process. The visualization
tasks enables data analysts to fast analyze large
quantities of information (millions of entities),
aiding quick understanding of data distributions
and rapid detection of patterns. This activity
“explore” naturally takes place before the
detailed specific analysis “understanding
complexity”, which may employ statistical and
data mining tools. Finally, visualization is a
powerful tool to “communicate” and “navigate”
through the results of a Visual Intelligence
process.

user into “direct” association with the data.
Visualization will present the data landscape in a
natural and intuitive form, making full use of the
human capacity to absorb and interact with
complex images, far beyond typical directory
structures or screens of text and numbers.

Exploration

-

Visualization components combine the use of
industry standard component technology with
advanced multidimensional data visualization.
More important the VU1 capabilities provide
tight integration with the underlying data
repository. This integration includes “drilldown”
features that enable you to get back to the real,
underlying data, while working with the visual
tasks. It is important at the outset that a “user
interface” is not only a screen design but also a
method of interacting with the data warehouse
and its data.

-

Visual exploration tools are:

-

-

Integrated with data storage and data analysis
(data warehouse, Excel,..)
Fast and interactive but easy-to-use
Natural and intuitive visual interface
Meaningful spatial relationship through 3D
geographic visualization
Multi-dimensional data analysis, filtering,
segmentation, pattern identification
Programmed to “lookfor something
interesting”
Open and Customizable

A concept demonstrator has been developed
funded by an EC project CONTENTS using the
Advanced Visual Systems’ OpenViz
DCOM/ActiveX components (visualization and
visual interaction) and Microsoft’s Visual Basic
(user interface) to illustrate the use of an
interactive visual interface for exploring data in a
standard Excel Spreadsheet.

Demonstrator: EXCEL Visualizer
VISUAL EXPLORATION
The “customizable” visualization component in
figure 2, is an example of the VU1 technique
serving as the visual front-end to any Excel
application. The user explores various aspects of
multidimensional data using a 3D glyph
visualization paradigm with value-based filtering
and data “drill-down”. The selected data to be
viewed is automatically transferred from Excel to
the embedded visualization component.

In this scenario, visualization techniques are used
to rapidly scan through the large quantities of
data enabling the user to visually search for
patterns and relationships. The user will discover
relationships without prior knowledge of what is
interesting and important information. The aim is
to directly engage the user in the Visual
Intelligence process using visualization as a
discovery tool, and as much as possible bring the

There are three important roles for visualization in the Visual Intelligence process:

-

Explore (What-if, interaction, drill-down, VUI, integration, open tools)
Understanding Complexity (visual tools integrated with analysis process)
Communicate and Navigate (Descriptive Visualization, Collaboration, Web)

I

5

Figure 2: The 3 0 glyph visualization is implemented as an ActiveX DCOM component, filly
integrated with Excel. Rows and columns are selected and highlighted in an Excel spreadsheet.
Data can easily be selected, viewed, edited, added or deleted. With a simple mouse-click, the user
has selected a “sphere” representing data in row 30 of the spreadsheet.

UNDERSTANDING COMPLEXITY

modelling and analysis tools will retain the human
involvement and understanding.

Understanding the complexity, i.e. the conversion
of appropriate data to relevant information
represents is another important role for
visualization. This means maintaining a high level
of human involvement and participation in the
processing and analysis of data through visual
interaction. While data mining typically relies on
numerical techniques such as statistics to uncover
relationships and patterns in large data warehouses,
visual tools incorporates the power of an additional
analysis tool; the human eye. There are many
parallels with the initial “exploring” of data, in that
the overall goal is summarization and compression
of data without significant loss of content.

Direct-manipulation Visual User Interface tools
provide intuitive and interactive user interfaces that
maximize information content. Users not only
view data, but also explore what they see. Picking
or drilling down operations are used to return
summary information, launch additional queries
into the data store, and propagate the applications
interface components with particular information,
thus promoting the process of information
discovery.
AVS’s open Java and DCOM component
architectures represent the framework for
integrated visualization and VU1 tools within the
scope of a Visual Intelligence process.
Furthermore, these tools provide a sophisticated
data model that can represent all types of, and
dimensions of, data. The tools can easily operate
on data from various sources, including operational
databases and data warehouses, dynamic data
feeds, and files out put from other applications.
The visualization tools can integrate diverse data

Although sophisticated data mining tools is
available, they can often appear as inaccessible
“black boxes” to the user. Moreover, response to
the output ranges from blind trust and acceptance
because of expert status of the data mining
package, through to skeptical distrust because the
underlying techniques are invisible and poorly
understood. Integrating visual tools with the data
6

Communication tools are:

sources and analytical processes in a single Visual
Intelligence process.

-

“Understanding Complexity” tools are:

-

-

Integrated with data storage and data analysis
(database, data warehouse, etc)
Intuitive and interactive visual interface Visual User Interface
Direct engagement of the user - immediate,
continuous feedback
Computation steering of the data analysis
process
Open and Customizable

Delivering the right information in an
appropriate context
2D and 3D Descriptive Visualization tools
Open and Customizable graphs
Annotation, layout, axes, color map, text
Animation supported on any variable
GIF, TIFF, VRML formats
Collaborative or Web-based visualization “Thin” and “Fat” visualization clients

The Communication role can be thought of as the
last step in a Visual Intelligence process, but the
same visual tools may assume different roles in the
process.

COMMUNICATION
The final role of Visualization is in effectively
communicating a vision, such that it is accurately
shared and understood by the audience. This
seemingly easy task can employ an entire
marketing department in defining and conveying
the features of a service. It is unlikely that the
business managers and IT specialists will be able
to find a common language for their discussions,
but a common expression could be possible in a
three dimensional visual representation.

“SMART” DOCUMENTS FOR WEBENABLED COLLABORATION
With the increasing use of Microsoft’s electronic
documents (Office 97), distributed by Internet and
Intranet, the opportunity to provide easy-to-use,
advanced interactive 3D visualization techniques
within electronic documents on the powerful PC
desktop has become possible. Open and
customizable visualization components allow the
author of a report to distribute the relevant
electronic information coupled with an embedded
data analysis-viewer “smartdoc”, which allows the
recipients to interactively examine the data in the
same way as the original analyst. Instead of being a
dumb document, the “smartdoc” would be a
complete data exploration application through
which a reader could, via embedded ActiveX
visualization/analysis components, explore the data
underlying the report. Instead of being a static
summary document the report becomes much more
like a very natural interface or portal onto the data.

Communication tools support the ability to draw
the users focus to the key relationships already
discovered and deliver enough information and in
the right context for effective decision making. By
preparing and presenting the data graphically, the
user can uncover properties of the data and quickly
and easily detect patterns or deviations from
expected results. He or she can get a picture of
“what the data is trying to tell hidher”, and then
perhaps confirm the observations with other
statistical analysis.

To embed the new assembled visualization
ActiveX component into a Word97 document,
simply import the ActiveX control into your
Word97 document like any GIF or TIFF file and
add interactive 3D visualization to your electronic
document. This document can then be transmitted
to colleagues over the network. The ActiveX
components reside locally on your PC and must
only be downloaded and installed once on your
local PC.

Visual Intelligence allows the user to focus on
what is important, but it’s critical to have
immediate access to the detail data behind the
summary data. Detail data should be available to
help provide the rationale for discovered trends.
Web-based technology provides the framework for
a superior navigation tool through the Visual
Intelligence process.

7

About the European ESPRIT Project
CONTENTS - Start 1 January, 1999

CONCLUSION
The ability of businesses to collect data has
outpaced their ability to analyze it. As data
repositories grow larger, applications that can
process this data become increasingly important.
Visual Intelligence is emerging as an essential
technique for exploiting the information content of
multidimensional databases, and this technique is
revolutionizing the functionality of business
desktop applications. Visual Intelligence tools
developed within the European Project
CONTENTS provide capabilities which are key to
the information discovery process.
0

0

0

0

0

0

The objective of the CONTENTS Project is to
develop customisable Application Components for
the interactive visual analysis of data on powerful
PC platforms. The data of interest are large
multivariate data sets (engineering, medical and
commercial) generated by simulation / modelling /
measurement running in a distributed and
heterogeneous environment (including NT-based
Intel parallel processor and suitable UNIX
platforms). The components will be based on the
emerging industry standard ActiveXDCOM
architecture, and will be properly "bridged"
towards CORBA based architectures, for multiplatform portability and compatibility.

Data structures for accurately modeling
complex business and warehouse data.
Information rich, interactive visual
representations of highly multivariate data.
Web-based component architecture
(DCOM/ActiveX or Java).
Tight integration between data and
visualization supporting "drill-down'' features.
Customizable and user friendly solutions
instead of inaccessible "black boxes".
Sharing of increased knowledge though
powerful communication tools.

These Interactive Visualisation Components will
be embedded within electronic documents,
allowing the author of a report to distribute the
relevant electronic information coupled with an
embedded High Performance data analysis-viewer
"smartdoc", which allows the recipients to
interactively examine the data in the same way as
the original analyst. Instead of being a dumb
document, the "smartdoc" will be a complete data
exploration application through which a reader
can, via embedded High Performance visualisation
/ analysis components explore the data underlying
the report.

Figure 3: Example of a "Smart" Document - interactive 3 0 visualization embedded in a
standard Word97 document. "Smart" documents provides solutions to the Visual
Intelligence process and contribute to the application 's acceptance on the business
desktop.
8

