A Multimedia Learning Environment for Creative Engineering Design
Jing-Jing Fang*, Yao-Ching Huang**
Email: fangj@mail.ncku.edu.tw
Department of Mechanical Engineering
National Cheng Kung Unversity,
Tainan 70101,TAIWAN

Abstract
The purpose of the paper is to design an
asynchronous on-line and off-line multimedia learning
environment for the learners. The learners include those
students in school and graduate people in work. It
provides the learners an interesting and vivid environment
for self study. The learners are able to systematically
study the selected course whatever/whenever they like.
The environment includes text, graphics, pictures, audio
and video in order to provide the users an easy and
comfortable learning environment. The body of the
subjects is well-designed by both the software tools and
hardware facilities, such as hypermedia hierarchy, motion
pictures, Video on Demand (VOD) films, and the
equipment for on-line interaction. The software is
popularization and freely shares with other users in the
net. Creative Engineering Design (CED) is selected as a
pioneer in developing such an object-oriented lesson in
the environment. The other object lesson, the cam
follower interactive instruction system is also introduced
in the paper.
Keywords: Multimedia Learning Environment, Creative
Engineering Design, Video on Demand, Cam
Follower.

1. Introduction
The traditional method for education is usually
proceeded in a classroom, the instructor systematically
presents his knowledge via the auxiliary tools, such as
boards, projectors, sliders, textbooks, etc. However,
students may not completely understand the essence of
the course in class. They ought to work after class by the
ways of reviewing their notes or references.
Nowadays, computer plays an important role in our
modern life. It is unarguable that the use of computers
--------------------------------------------*
**

Associate Professor
MSc Student

benefits of mankind. One of its applications in education
becomes eminent achievement. Because it’s easy with by
human that wins popularity to any levels of ages in a
family. By the flourished development of computer
network, information communications become more and
more frequent between people in a distance. Computers
are then deeply involved in as the auxiliary tools in daily
necessary. In short, education no longer limits students to
learn in school, or focuses their study from books.
Based on the fundamental theory of mechanism and
machine, configurations of mechanical devices are
capable to be designed and then constructed. It is also one
of the crucial subjects in mechanical engineering
education. In the research, CED and disk cams are the
selected subjects for asynchronous exhibitions in the
multimedia learning environment. The products of the
work are web pages, videotapes, and compact disks.
The object of the CED is devoted to present
engineering creative techniques and a novel creative
design methodology for the systematic generation of all
possible design configurations of mechanical devices.
With the authorization, the CED learning environment is
constructed based on the contents of the books “Creative
Design of Mechanical Devices” [1]. It is using in the
classes of undergraduate, graduate and extended
education school in mechanical engineers education for
the purpose of providing the learners the capabilities of
self studying, practicing and reviewing.
Cam is one of the widely applicable parts in
machinery. Practical applications for cam mechanisms are
numerous. One of the better-known applications is the
timing system used in automotive engines. Starting from
graphical cam definitions, the cam follower interactive
instruction system can apply to design the desired motion
curves in machinery.

2. Multimedia Learning Environment
The use of several media simultaneously is named
multimedia, which consists of the combinations of text,
graphics, images, audio and video. The multimedia
learning environment is separated into two types: one is
synchrony, another is asynchrony [2].

2.1 Synchrony
Synchrony denotes teaching and learning is
proceeded synchronously. Video and audio systems are
utilized in the classrooms. Therefore, an instructor could
give his talk during the same time in remote classrooms.
Discussion between students and instructor is ongoing in
real time via the system equipment. They, instructor and
students may not meet each other face-to-face. We named
the environment a Videoconference Classroom. The
classroom can be located in any places where hardware
environment is properly set up. Breaking space limitations
and discussions in real time between lecturer and students
are the advantages of synchronous learning. Moreover,
the common source of content is distributed to learners at
the same time in different places, that avoiding repetition
work of the lecture. Although it has several advantages,
steady and wide bandwidth network configuration is
absolutely needed. However, the cost of the equipment
using in this system is expensive, in addition, dozens
people are involved in to guard the system in process
straightly. Hence, synchronous system is not widely used
in constructing the learning environment.

2.2 Asynchrony
Asynchrony denotes the teaching and learning is
proceeded asynchronously. Based on the developed
techniques of networking, asynchronous learning is split
up into on-line and off-line status.

Kinematics, Dynamic Machinery, etc. Recently, many
software development company designs the interactive
multimedia instruction CD-ROM that provide the users to
connect directly to network which is so called Internet.
The usage of Internet accommodates the learner with
various sources from the net.
On-line Learning
The content of on-line learning is built by the
hypermedia technique, which is stored in the network
computer server. Students can study or review the
contents from the web site at anytime, whenever he/she
likes. According to the ways of exhibition, there are two
types of data sources. The first one is steady type. Based
on text, graphs and pictures are combined into it as the
auxiliary parts of the resources in order to provide the
learners a complete concept. The second is mobility type.
Videotapes are involved to shoot the motion pictures,
associate texts, matched sounds, speaking and music.
Because of easy making, fast transmitting, and
undemandingness of network bandwidth, the former is
common in on-line learning environment. However, it
shorts of sense of reality that enables the learners a whole
picture of the subject. On the other hand, the latter type
enables the learners’ sense of reality. Students would pay
more attention on the subjects due to the colorful and
diversified environment; hence the outcome is better than
the former one. But, huge amount of data and slow
transmission speed of the net are its weaknesses.
The content of on-line learning is shown in ways of
homepage format that is transmitted via the cable nets.
Contents are allowed to renew at anytime, therefore, it
always remains up-to-date. Besides, it offers a space for
public board for the latest announcements. Problem
discussions and communications between students and
students, or students and instructors would go through one
or both ways of electronic mail and guest book.

3. Configurations of the Learning Environment
Off-line Learning
Computer-Aided Instruction (CAI) is a typical
method of off-line learning [3]. In general, the content of
CAI — text, graphs, pictures, audio and video are stored
in a CD-ROM (Compact Disk Read Only Memory).
Recent product a DVD-ROM (Digital Versatile Disk) is
capable to store seven times more capacities than a CD.
Therefore, these two kinds of disks are basic storage for
off-line learning.
In general, interactive response on off-line state is
faster than on-line state. Once the contents have been
stored, editing is not allowable. Hence, it is suitable to
construct the core courses that are well-developed
fundamental curriculums, such as Mechanisms,

3.1 Hardware and System Architectures
In order to improve the outcomes of learning, the
system comprises mainly web pages and VOD on the net.
Computers are prerequisite equipment at the server ends,
which are used as a tool for learners at the client ends to
access World Wide Web, File Transfer Protocol and Video
on Demand from the net.
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between clients
and servers. The net is one of the Internet, Intranet, or
Extranet. The WWW server of our work is working under
Windows NT 4.0(IIS 4.0) in a personal computer.

FrontPage 98 [4] is used as the tool of web page
construction for the web pages. Operating system
FreeBSD 2.2.6 and RealServer are employed in the VOD
system. The server machine is set up and administrated in
the Virtual Reality and Multimedia laboratory in the
department.
WWW Server

Client

Internet
Intranet
Extranet

FTP Server

VOD Server
Fig.1 The relationship between clients and servers

3.2 Designed Processes
Figure 2 shows the processes of content creation on
the Internet.
Script Design
Body Collection and Sortation
Select Developing Tool
Corpus

browsers.
Step 4. Corpus
The form of the web page should be self-consistent
easy to read. Resolution of screen should be well set in
advance, 640×480 or 800×600 are suggested options to
give the readers a comfortable sight of view. The size of
graphics and video film ought to be reproduced as small
as it can be for avoiding network traffics.
Step 5. Test and Debug
Browse the web site with different web-browsers in
order to avoid errors occurred in some particular
browsers. After testing thoroughly and debug, the web
site is open to the learners.

3.3 Video on Demand
Since the sprout of World Wide Web, quite a few
scholars started their studies in synchronous and
asynchronous distance learning through internet in order
to develop a vivid and intriguing multimedia
environment. Part of the researches is focus on the
techniques of digitized compression and programming.
Recently, many software companies make their efforts to
develop network multimedia programs; one of them is the
RealNetworks Software Corporation. Based on their free
trial production, we combined the network browsers with
the RealSystem to offer a function of Video On Demand.
The components of RealSystem are shown in Figure 3.
Video

Audio
End Users

RealEncoder
Test and Debug
Fig. 2 Flowchart of web contents creation
Step 1. Script Design
It contains course conspectus and plans that are
displayed in hierarchical order. In order to express the
body logically, nodes or hyperlinks are arranged in its
proper positions.
Step 2. Body Collection and Sortation
The bodies of the content are carefully tailored to
related script. Combined the media such as text, video,
pictures, action film, audio or graphs with associated
textual description.
Step 3. Select Developing Tools
Evaluate the ongoing application browsers (Netscape
Navigator or Internet Explorer), web pages creator
(Netscape Composer, FrontPage 98, … etc.), web
languages (HTML, CGI, JAVA) and useful plug-in

RealPlayer

End Users
RealPlayer

RealVideo
RealAudio
RealServer

End Users
Internet
Intranet
Extranet

RealPlayer

Fig. 3 The RealSystem Components
RealPlayer is a browser plug-in shareware, provides
the function of real-time decompressing on network.
Basically, such a video/audio file would occupy huge
apace in memory. In general, the file is either downloaded
from the server to the user’s computer or opened to
display on screen. Due to network bandwidth limitations,
it takes time to open or download the huge-size file. By
using RealPlayer, the file is loaded to machine buffer; the
users can concurrently play and download. In addition,
discontinuous phenomena in video playing would not
occur.
The video files, named AVI files, are converted from

the media hardware such as VCR, V8 or VCD. It is
distilled by a powerful image capture card installed in a
PC. However, the size of AVI file is so large that can not
directly play on the net. Therefore, we firstly transfer the
AVI files into the RealVideo file format. The RealEncoder
is then employed to compress the RealVideo files. All the
compress files are stored in the video server (RealServer),
therefore it can be immediately accessed through the net.
Based on different bandwidths used on the net,
associated compress ratio is selected to make the
RealVideo aforetime. Therefore, the right bandwidth is
selected by the users to fit in their systems. The higher the
bandwidth, the better the quality one can have.

3.4 Videotape
Apart from web site creation out of the contents,
videotapes are also employed in order to enrich the
contents. The bodies of the videotape may be a sequence
of motion pictures of a subject, computer animation of
action texts, or something related to the exhibited subject.
The software, Director 6.0 from Macromedia Inc. [5]
and 3D Studio Max [6] from Autodesk Inc., are employed
to program the animation pictures at the final script. Via
the video capture card, the video proof are transferred into
many pieces of AVI files. Then, Premiere 5.0 [7] (Adobe
Inc.) is used to piece together the AVI files with the
scripts of music and voices. After the video is revised
completely, it is then stored to a VCD. The video files are
stored in the RealServer, therefore, the learners could
browse it whenever he/her likes.

4. Creativity Engineering Design Web Site
“Creativity Engineering Design” web course is using
in the classes of undergraduate, graduate and extended
education school in the mechanical engineers department
for the purpose of providing the learners the capabilities
of practicing and reviewing. The bodies consist of the
following topics:
1. What is Design? — It describes the definitions of
design. The processes of engineering design, mechanical
design, machine design, and mechanism design are
presented. The nature of creative design is also explained.
2. Engineering Design Methodology — It involves design
process, stages of design, sources of necessity, problem
statements, engineering models and rational engineering
problem solving.
3.Characteristics of Design — Characteristics of
creativity introduce terminology and its definitions,
creative personality, barriers for creativity, enhancement
of creativity and creative process.
4. Creative Techniques — Creative techniques have been

proven the most useful in stimulating engineers’
production. The techniques employ attribute listing,
morphological chart analysis, brainstorm and checklist
method.
5.Creative Mechanism Design — Based on modification
of existed devices, a creative design methodology is
illustrated. Every possible topological structure of
mechanical devices is derived.
6. Design Considerations — It includes functional
considerations, standards and regulations, economic
considerations, green considerations and engineering
ethics.
7. Product Evaluation — Evaluation is the final proof of a
successful design and usually involves the testing of a
prototype in the laboratory. Testing is the determination of
performance, workability, reliability, and durability for
evaluating a product.
8. Design protections and Patents — It includes
trademarks, copyrights, patents and research notebooks.
9. Engineering Communications — It includes report
compose, verbal report and engineering proposal.
The course is now taking at the Department of
Mechanical Engineering in National Cheng Kung
University, TAIWAN. The original contents has been
translated and revised for the purpose of studying among
Chinese students. Figure 4 illustrates the head page of the
Creative Engineering Design web site. The subject of the
pages is divided into sequences of branches: introduction,
contents, board, discussion, assignments, exhibitions,
examinations and guest books. Students can choose either
dynamic or statistic types to browse it. In the dynamic
type, lectures were giving a talk with associate
transparencies synchronized display on the screen as
shown in Figure 5.

5. Disk Cam-Follower Learning System

Fig. 4 CED Homepage

Fig. 5 Film with Transparency
At the end of the CED course, students ought to
hand in a report titled a self-construct creation, such as a
four-foot walking mechanism or a turnable four-foot
power mechanism. Figure 6 illustrates the creations,
which are exhibited at the end of the course and framed
into the exhibition part in the web site.

Cam-follower is widely used in machines in industry.
It is also an obligatory subject of machinery in
mechanical engineering education. Many textbooks on
machinery are published for years. In recent years, many
kinds of multimedia instruction software are available to
provide the learners the other ways of learning interface.
However, such instruction software involving machinery
topics is not so many as general instruction software in
market. Therefore, we create the multimedia instruction
software — "Disk Cam Follower Learning System". The
software combines text, graphics, audio, images, and
video to provide the other kinds of learning interface for
students. The process of software development includes
script design, content preparation, programming, and
testing. Based on the off-line developed software,
Authorware 4.0 from Macromedia Inc., the final script is
then plugged in under network browsers. Therefore, the
learners are able to on-line interact with the instructor. In
the meantime, the progress of the learners can be marked
through the Internet.
Figure 7 illustrates the term definitions of a cam.
Once the users locate mouse cursor on the term, it’s
definitions and descriptions will be showed up. The
processes of profile design of a specific cam are
demonstrated in Figure 8. Moreover, an external
executable file “Motion Curves Design of Cam”
programmed in C language is linked to the instruction
software to facilitate the computational capabilities (see
Figure 9).

Fig. 7 Term Definitions of A Cam

Fig. 6 CED Exhibition Room

for motion curves in the cam system, a linking of the
executable file is used to facilitate fast computation.
The learning curves of the two asynchronous
multimedia learning software in the paper are currently
under estimation. The questionnaires have been collected
from part of the learners, it is appreciated that the learning
environments are proved useful for the students to provide
a possible way for both preview and review the course
contents. Information and latest news are spread easily
and quickly. Moreover the techniques and the processes
of developing the multimedia learning environment can
be systematically transferred to the other courses using
both in school and off school.

Acknowledgments
Fig. 8 Graphical Profile Design

The authors wish to thank grant support from NII
(National
Information
Infrastructure)
Enterprise
Promotion Association. We also acknowledge the
members of Virtual Reality and Multimedia Laboratory in
NCKU for their assistance in system hardware
maintenance.

References

Fig. 9 Motion Curves Design of Cam-Follower

6. Conclusion
The multimedia learning interface is implemented by
ways of either synchrony or asynchrony. In the paper, we
present two types of asynchronous multimedia learning
environments to utilize in the courses for mechanical
engineering students. The multimedia web site of Creative
Engineering Design course is using in the current study
for both undergraduate and graduate students. It is a
representation of asynchronous on-line learning
environment. In order to enhance the learning effects the
system involves two basic formats of web pages and
video on demand. Under the acceptable bandwidths in
Taiwan academic net (TANET), students can possible
take the full course via the Internet.
The other instruction software of Cam-Follower
System is also presented to represent the asynchronous
off-line learning environment. The document is stored in
the web server and learners can browse it through the net
whatever he/she likes. Due to the complex calculations

1. Yan, H.S., Creative Design of Mechanical Devices, Springer,
1998.
2. Chen, N.S., Integration of Synchronous and Asynchronous
Distance Learning, Computer Center, Ministry of Education,
Taipei, Taiwan, 1998.
3. Huang, Y.C., Fang, J.J., Yan, H.S., A Multimedia Instruction
Software for Motion Curves Design and Applications of Disk
Cam-Follower Systems, Proceedings of The First National
Conference on the Design of Mechanisms and Machines,
Tainan, TAIWAN, pp.213-218, 1998.
4. Li, Z.D., FrontPage 98 Secret, GOTOP Information Inc.,
Taipei, TAIWAN, 1997.
5. Wu Q.W., Multimedia Practice for Director 5.0, Unalis
Corporation, Taipei, TAIWAN, 1997.
6. Autodesk Incorporated, 3D Studio MAX User Guide, 1996.
7. Adobe Systems Incorporated, Adobe Premiere 5.0 User
Guide, 1997.

