2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualisation of spectator activity at stadium events
Alistair Morrison, Marek Bell, Matthew Chalmers
Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow
{morrisaj,marek,matthew}@dcs.gla.ac.uk
The analysis of spectator behaviour can be tackled in
a number of ways. Interviews with supporter groups
from a variety of sports can help to highlight general
trends and gather knowledge on different individuals’
perspectives on their activity. Similarly, an ethnographicstyle approach, where analysts accompany spectators to
events, can provide insight into the social context of
spectating, and how the event itself fits into the day of
the spectator. In addition to these methods, however, it
can also be beneficial to log data from the event. A
mobile device carried by a spectator can track many
details of the day that might be misremembered or which
otherwise might go unreported. Such a system can also
scan for ‘unseen’ properties such as wireless networks or
mobile devices carried by others. These might not be
obvious to a spectator at an event, but could be important
considerations for the design of an application to use in
such contexts.
Although the logging of such information may be a
straightforward process, its subsequent analysis can be
more challenging, as the corpus can comprise a large
collection of heterogeneous data recorded by many
spectators over a long timeframe.
This paper presents an information visualisation tool
designed to handle such data, and thereby to support
analysts in understanding the behaviour and experience
of spectators at stadium-based events, with a view to
designing novel mobile applications for use in such
settings. The system can operate as a standalone tool or
be linked to the Replayer toolkit [3] to utilise the various
visualisation components Replayer offers.
The next section contains a discussion of the types
of phenomena of interest to analysts exploring the
activity of spectators at stadium-based events, and an
outline of the requirements of a tool designed to aid them
in this analysis. This is followed by a review of work
related to these topics. Thereafter, a description is
provided of the information visualisation system
designed for this analysis task, explaining its various
capabilities and illustrating its utility with some sets of
real-world data recorded by spectators at football
matches. Some possibilities for future work are then
discussed before finally we offer our conclusions.

Abstract
Recent advances in mobile device technology have
opened up new possibilities in enhancing the experience
of spectators at stadium-based sporting events. In
creating novel applications for use in such settings,
designers must be aware of the current practices of
spectators and of features of the environment at such
events that novel applications may seek to exploit. This
work forms an early part of the Designing the
Augmented Stadium project. Data sets have been
collected from spectators, logging the results of
Bluetooth scans alongside GPS location. This paper
presents an information visualisation tool that can be
used in the analysis and exploration of this data, to
provide insight into the activities of spectators, the
relationship between an individual spectator and the
crowd as a whole and the suitability of stadium
environments for applications based on infrastructure
such as mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) and wireless
mesh networking. Various visualisation tools are
described and example cases are illustrated, using
several real-world data sets recorded at football
matches.

1. Introduction
Attending stadium-based sports is a popular activity,
with a variety of different sports worldwide regularly
drawing crowds of thousands. In recent years, a
proliferation of new commodity mobile hardware, in the
form of phones equipped with Bluetooth, wi-fi, storage
and camera capabilities, has created new opportunities
for enhancing the experience of spectators at such events.
For example, many have begun to record and share video
of their experiences at sports [1]. In creating technologies
for use in such surroundings, designers require an
intimate understanding of the activities of spectators, in
order to provide applications that fit well with current
practice. In particular, the success of any applications
will depend upon enhancing, rather than detracting from,
the powerful social experience of spectating. There is
also a need for new understandings as to how to design
for crowds – moving from human computer interaction’s
emphasis on individuals and small groups to
consideration of interaction among large crowds. Also,
new technologies such as mobile ad hoc networking
(MANETs) and wireless mesh networking [2], are being
developed that may particularly suit such crowds but
application design based on them is at an early stage of
development.
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.64

2. Visualisation tool requirements
The work described in this paper supports early
exploratory work in Designing the Augmented Stadium –
a two and a half year project seeking to enhance the
experience of spectators at sporting events through the
219

becomes part of the ‘crowd’: as the participant
approaches the stadium, what is the rate at which the
crowd size starts to increase? Looking across multiple
events, it would be of interest to examine routines and
the extent to which activity is repeated: whether the
journey times are similar on every occasion, how often
the participant sees the same people, whether the same
people are always seen in the same places, and so on.
The second set of requirements is focussed more on
allowing an analyst to explore general patterns or trends
in the data set that might have an impact on the design of
mobile applications for use in such settings. Specific
examples here might include the number of unique
Bluetooth devices seen across a day, how long these
devices stay in range of the participant’s scanner, or how
often previously spotted devices are re-discovered later
on in the day. It might be a simple task to generate mean
figures that provide answers to some of these questions,
but there is potential for a deeper understanding of the
data set if a richer summary of its contents can be
presented, or if an analyst can interact with the data
through drilling-down or other means to further explore
its contents.
The following section reviews some existing work
in this area, and looks at existing tools that may aid
analysts in these data exploration tasks.

design and application of mobile and ubiquitous
computer (ubicomp) systems. In order to gather data with
which to examine the activity of spectators, several
volunteer fans (referred to hereafter as ‘participants’)
were recruited to carry small unobtrusive logging devices
with them to sporting events.

2.1 Data logged at sporting events
A focus of the Augmented Stadium project is on
designing systems that might provide for interactions
within crowds. To capture some notion of crowd
membership from the participant’s experience, the device
contained a Bluetooth logger that performed a scan every
10 seconds, logging the unique identifiers (MAC IDs) of
every Bluetooth-enabled device detected. It has
previously been postulated that such scans can provide
an approximation of crowd sizes [4] and such data could
also be useful in feeling out the potential of Bluetooth as
a means of interacting with other devices. The devices
also recorded timestamped GPS logs showing
participants’ geographic locations over the course of the
day of the sporting event.
In these trials, the logging devices were iMate SP5
smartphones. These phones have in-built, Class 2,
Bluetooth hardware, capable of detecting other Bluetooth
devices up to a range of 10 metres. Scans were run
continuously, with each individual scan lasting 10
seconds. The Bluetooth hardware used was capable of
detecting up to 33 devices simultaneously; if there were
more than 33 devices in range, the hardware returned the
first 33 detected each scan, which is essentially a random
sample. Location data was logged using external
BlueNEXT BN-905GR 32-channel GPS units.

3. Related work
There are several existing systems that can be used
for the analysis of data generated from trials of mobile
and ubiquitous software applications. For example, DRS
[5] allows the analysis of video, audio and system log
files. Designed with a focus on supporting qualitative
analysis, DRS allows analysts to involve system log files
in the process of transcribing and coding videos. These
different media are then used together to create a
description of the recorded events.
Similar to DRS, but with more focus on information
visualisation tools for exploring data, Replayer [3] is
another system for analysing the data sets from mobile
application trials. Like DRS, Replayer provides potential
for video analysis, but also includes an integrated set of
visualisation tools to allow data to be processed and
displayed in a variety of ways. The tools introduced in
the following section can be run as stand-alone systems
or as part of Replayer.
The Cityware system [4] may be the tool for
analysing this kind of data that is best known within the
ubicomp field. A simple chart of Bluetooth devices is
described, which is similar to the visualisation tool
presented in the following section, but lacking the
interactive and coordinated view functionalities. The
Cityware system was tailored to complementary forms of
analysis, in that it was based on aggregate densities and
flows of people in particular urban areas, which in turn
were to be used in architecturally based models of those
areas. Our work focuses more on informing design of
systems for individual people, instead of abstract models
of movement, space and infrastructure.

2.2. Visualisation system requirements
The work presented in this paper documents a suite
of visualisation tools designed to aid analysts in
exploring the generated logs. This process comes at an
early design stage of the Augmented Stadium project,
where analysts and designers are seeking to understand
existing spectator behaviour that new tools could
support, and also to explore what is possible given the
technologies under examination and the patterns of
activity usually seen at such sporting events.
The requirements for the tool can therefore be
divided into these two main areas; firstly, that of learning
about the activities of spectators, to complement work
done in interviews and other means, and secondly in
allowing exploratory analysis of the data collected, to
provide an understanding of what resources might be
available for potential new applications to exploit.
In terms of the first of the requirements, the created
tool should allow an analyst to examine journeys made
by spectators on the day of an event. Looking at a single
event, it would be of interest to see what forms of
transport are taken, whether the journey can be taken
efficiently or if there are some periods of waiting around,
and at what stages of the day the individual spectator

220

Figure 1. A BTvis plot, showing Bluetooth scan logs recorded by a spectator at the 2008 UEFA Cup
Final. The x-axis represents time and each unique device seen during the scanning period is given a
row in the y-axis (although only a small number are labelled). For each device, a horizontal bar is drawn
at the periods at which the device was in view of the scanner. Various colouring schemes are offered,
such as, as used in the figure, the total duration each device was in view (shown here in minutes). A
user has placed the mouse cursor over one bar, highlighting in green every occurrence of this device
and showing a pop-up display with more details.
identifiers of the devices that could be detected at that
time.
In order to provide a summary of the Bluetooth scan
data, a visualisation was created that could parse this log
data and summarise its contents on a single plot. Figure 1
provides an example screenshot of this BTvis
component. The plot can be thought of as a stacked
timeline, where the x-axis is time, and the y-axis is
device ID, with a single horizontal row for each unique
device seen. On the row for each device d, a horizontal
line (bar) is drawn at the points on the timeline at which
d was in view of the logging device. Devices are
arranged alphabetically on the y-axis. The axis is labelled
with only a small subset of the devices shown
(approximately 1 in 100 in the figure), but bars for all
devices are plotted on the graph.
As well as providing this top-level view of the
logged data, the analyst can now drill down to see further
detail of particular areas as required. A smaller plot in
the top right corner of the component shows an overview
of the full data set currently loaded. To see a particular
period or set of devices in more detail, an analyst can
zoom into a specified area of the plot. The overview
shows the full data set, but with a green rectangle to
show the portion that is currently shown in the main
view, thereby providing a focus and context approach.
The analyst controls the zooming by drawing a rectangle
in either the main view or the context view to specify the
new area to show in the main view.

Similar abstractions to those of the Cityware work
but at an even larger scale were shown in [6], which
involved the generation of coarse-grained city-scale
maps of people’s density based on concentrations of
mobile phone signals sampled from GSM infrastructure.
Again, this work did not explore individuals’ activities
and resources.
Crawdad [7] is perhaps the foremost collection of
wireless network data sets, but analysis has tended to
focus on aggregate statistics, e.g. [8], or relatively small
and abstract mathematical structures, e.g. the clusters and
cliques of [9].

4. Visualisation of spectator activity
This section introduces the system created to aid
analysts in exploring the data logged by spectators
attending sporting events. The various visualisations and
interaction mechanisms are described and sample realworld data sets are used to illustrate some of the tool’s
capabilities.

4.1. Bluetooth scan log visualisation
It was explained in Section 2 that analysts seek to
examine data collected from regularly performed
Bluetooth scans during a stadium-based event. The log
data forming the input to the visualisation tool contains a
series of entries composed of a timestamp and the unique
221

The bars on the BTvis plot can be coloured using a
scale representing one of a number of possible
properties, as selected from the combo box in the bottom
right of the component. For instance, an analyst can elect
to colour each bar by its length, with short bars drawn in
dark colours and longer bars drawn in brighter colours. It
is often more useful not to colour each bar separately, but
rather to use a single colour for all the bars representing a
single device. Examples of this would include the
number of times a device was seen over the course of the
logging period, the cumulative time that device was in
view, or the time it was first spotted. The chosen colour
scale is shown in a key on the right of the component.
The plot is also equipped with a number of
interactive controls. Tooltips are provided, so hovering
the mouse cursor over any bar provides details of the
device name and the exact time at which it was in view.
Placing the mouse over a bar in this manner also
highlights via a green border all the bars on that row –
that is, hovering over any bar for a device highlights all
the times at which it was logged. This can be a useful aid
to browsing the data, as the fully zoomed-out overview
can be quite densely packed. The key on the right of the
BTvis component behaves in a similar manner; when the
analyst places the mouse cursor over any key value, all
the corresponding bars are highlighted in green. Analysts
can also click on any key value to toggle it on or off,
which filters the corresponding bars in or out of the plots.
The data shown in Figure 1 was recorded at the 2008
UEFA Cup Final – a football match between Zenit St.
Petersburg and Glasgow Rangers that took place at the
City of Manchester Stadium on the 14th of May 2008.
The match kicked off at 19:45 local time and lasted until
approximately 21:40. The plot colours all the bars for
each unique device ID by the total duration (in minutes)
the device was in view and the y-axis shows MAC
addresses1 of the Bluetooth devices detected (although it
can also be set to show owner-assigned SSIDs if these
are also logged). There were 2238 unique devices seen
by the participant’s scanner during the event. UEFA
reports the official match attendance as being 43878.
It can be seen from the plot that the recorded data is
quite rich, and the tool has been quite successful in
conveying an overview of the data set from which a
reasonable amount of structure is visible. For example,
the two halves of the match are immediately obvious,
appearing in lighter colour than the rest of the plot. The
half time interval is also apparent, being represented as a
darker period between the two lighter areas.
The darker-coloured areas of the plot represent
fleeting interactions with other devices. It can be inferred
that these occur at periods of motion, where either the
participant has been on the move, or perhaps has been
stationary while the crowd moves around him/her. These
periods could perhaps be while entering the stadium or
moving among crowds outside, where new passers-by
are constantly encountered, but very few are seen for as

long as those that are detected during the seated period of
the match itself.

4.2. Coordinating with map view
Although certain structures are apparent from the
visualisation shown in Figure 1, an analyst could not
deduce much of a spectator’s activity from a plot like
this alone. To help to further understand spectator
behaviour, analysts can view the participant’s
geographical position by visualising the recorded GPS
coordinates. The tool generates a coloured plot that can
be viewed in Google Earth [10]. The full trail recorded
over the course of the trial is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. A plot of GPS data recorded during the
build-up to the match. The colour scale used in
the key on the right allows an analyst to follow
the direction of the trail, and to see roughly
when each location was visited.
The trail is coloured over time, as shown in the scale
to the right of the map, to give some temporal structure
to the plot. However, it can still be difficult to relate
periods of the trail to patterns in the BTvis view and the
exact times at which they occurred. To aid this, the
BTvis and Google Earth plot tools are coordinated, so
that performing a selection in one view highlights the
corresponding period on the other.
Figure 3 illustrates an example of this functionality.
On the left is a zoomed-in portion of a BTvis plot,
coloured from dark to light by the total time each device
was in view, and on the right is a map. The left part of
the BTvis plot (marked as period A) shows a few devices
in view that are coloured light blue, indicating that they
persist for a reasonably long time. To investigate this
period and why it might appear so different from period
B, the analyst selects this section, by drawing a rectangle
around the bars in period A. This action instructs the
system to plot on the map only the geographical position
of the participant at the corresponding times. From the
figure, it can be seen that the trail during this period
appears to be following a railway line. It can therefore be
inferred that the participant was travelling by train and
that these longer-lasting bars are the devices of other
passengers. Having left the train and walking towards the
stadium (shown in the bottom right of the figure), the
participant has presumably entered a larger crowd,

1

Here and throughout the paper, only the first parts of the address are
shown to protect anonymity.

222

explaining the greater number and shorter duration of the
bars shown in period B.

This is shown in Figure 4, which shows the extended
data including the early part of the day. The analyst has
placed the mouse over a device seen during the time of
the match, and the green highlighting shows that the
same device was seen around 7 hours earlier. As well as
highlighting this finding in the BTvis plot, the map is
also updated to show that this device was indeed spotted
in the stadium and at a different part of the city earlier in
the day. A single overlap such as this may be a random
intersection of paths, but devices that are detected several
times in different locations are more likely to belong to
people with some kind of relationship to the participant,
e.g. friends or family. Understanding the frequencies and
locations of such perhaps unplanned proximities was
important to our ongoing work on mobile applications
based on social networking.

Figure 3. The BTvis plot on the left is coloured
dark to light by the total time each device was in
view. Period A has several devices that remain
in view for a reasonably long time. The analyst
selects this period, which shows the
participant’s position at this time on the map;
the participant appears to be travelling by train.

4.3. Analysis of speed and crowd density
The BTvis plot shown in Figure 1 gives a sense of
the periods of the event at which the participant was
among large crowds of people. It was suggested that
such crowds might offer high enough densities of
devices to support new infrastructure based on mobile ad
hoc networks (MANETs), but the densities and their
spatial distribution were unknown. The system provides
a means to see a more formalised summary of crowd
density, as shown in Figure 5A. The figure shows a plot
of crowd density over time for the same data set as
Figure 1, again examining the early part of the day prior
to the match.
The density graph and map views can be further
complemented by a plot showing the participant’s speed
of movement over the course of the event. This is
calculated from the timestamped GPS logs and can be
viewed alongside the density plot, as seen in Figure 5B.

In addition to querying the map for specific periods,
an analyst might also want to see locations for all the
occasions that a participant encountered one particular
device. For example in Figure 1, as explained above,
each encountered device has a separate horizontal line
and every bar on that horizontal line shares the same
colour. From this it can be seen that the people seen for
the longest periods during the match – those devices
coloured in light blue – were only seen at this time and
don’t appear in other parts of the data. However, on
zooming out and examining data recorded earlier in the
day of the match, it can be seen that some of these
devices had been previously encountered. Should an
analyst click on one of these lines, the map is updated to
show all the locations at which this device was detected.

Figure 5. Timeseries plots showing the density
of devices detected (top) and speed of
participant movement (bottom) over the period
prior to the match.
The density plot is created by calculating the number
of unique devices detected over five minute intervals. It
was explained in Section 2 that the Bluetooth scans
performed by logging devices were limited to scans that
could each return a maximum of 33 results. To produce a
timeseries plot such as Figure 5A, these scan results were
aggregated over time. Plotting merely the number of
devices returned at each scan would give a graph that
was fine-grained in the temporal scale, but limited in the

Figure 4. A single device can be selected from
the BTvis plot to show all the locations at which
it was detected. Here, a device detected during
the match (roughly the period 19:45 – 21:40) had
previously been seen much earlier in the day in
a different part of the city.

223

crowd begins to dissipate. There is one brief area,
however, where the density drops quickly for a short
period before rising again. This may indicate that the
participant elected to take a slight detour that was not in
keeping with the general movement of the crowd.
Comparing this to the lower map plot, it can be seen that
the same part of the journey shows a reduction in speed.
This part of the route seems to be walking through a car
park; it can perhaps be inferred that the participant tried
to take this alternative route, but maybe found that
walking between the parked cars was actually slower so
decided to re-join the main body of the crowd.

size of crowd it could report; such plots would appear to
have long plateaus at the maximum scan size, so an
analyst would only be able to deduce that device density
was greater than or equal to 33 at these times.
Together, the plots of Figure 5 can help make clear
to the analyst the relationships between participant travel
and the size of crowd encountered. It can be inferred
from the figure (and could be confirmed through linking
to the map or by participant interviews), that the
participant was walking between locations from 14:30 to
15:00 and 16:30 to 17:00 – periods at which high crowd
densities were observed. Faster travel was observed as
the participant travelled by bus between 18:30 and 19:00,
and it can be seen that this was a less crowded part of the
journey. These timeseries graphs can also be linked to
the previously introduced components, in the same
manner as shown above with the BTvis and map.
Selecting a section of interest on the timeseries, for
example, can then be used to see participant location at
this period on the map.
Alternatively, should the analyst prefer, these
properties can also be viewed by location, using similar
plots of GPS trails as seen in Figure 2, but colouring by
density or speed rather than time. Figure 6 shows an
example of this, taken from a match between Celtic and
Rangers at Celtic Park in Glasgow. The figure plots
participant location, coloured by density on the map at
the top and by speed on the map at the bottom. As in
previous examples, a colour scale is used where low to
high values are coloured dark to light.

4.4. Co-occurrence of detected devices across
multiple scanners
A final function of the tool is to explore the degree
of overlap of devices detected by participants attending
an event together. Such information could suggest where
and how often it occurred that two devices X and Y, that
were generally too far apart for direct MANET
communication, might find other devices that could
potentially act as efficient network intermediaries within
the stadium, passing messages between X and Y in two
network hops. This means of displaying the overlap
between sets of recorded devices can also be used to
show overlap in re-occurrence of detected devices
outside the stadium and even across multiple events.
Such intermediaries are the focus of work such as peerto-peer file sharing based on MANETs.
Figure 7 shows two BTvis plots, each displaying
data for two participants attending a match together;
devices detected by participant X are shown in blue and
those seen by participant Y are shown in red. The tool
has filtered out certain bars in each case, which are
shown in grey. Two different forms of filter based on
overlap of detected devices are possible. In plot A, an
overlap is set to be a device detected by both participants
at any point in the logs: all bars for those devices seen by
only one of the participants are coloured in grey. In plot
B, an overlap is treated more strictly as being a device
seen by both participants at the same time, so bars are
coloured grey if they were not in view of both the
scanners at that period.
In the data set used for this example, 2572 unique
devices were seen in the trial, with a total of 21999 bars
drawn on the BTvis plot (21999 instances of a device
being in view of one of the two scanners). The overlap
for devices seen at any time (in Figure 7A) is 20025 of
21999 (91%) and for devices seen concurrently (in 7B) is
7832 (36%). The analysis tool can also generate plots
showing this concurrent overlap over time. Figure 8A
shows a plot of percentage overlap, bucketed into 5minute intervals. For context, Figure 8B shows the
average density of devices detected over the same period,
also bucketed into 5 minute intervals. These results, and
the two images of Figure 7, suggest that while it is likely
that both logging devices will see a neighbouring device
at some stage, it cannot be expected that they will both
see it at the same time.

Figure 6. A route taken when leaving a stadium
coloured by crowd density around the scanning
device (top) and speed (bottom).
In this example, the participant is walking away
from the stadium immediately after the match has ended.
From the density plot, it is apparent that the crowd
density generally decreases as the participant moves
further away from the stadium – presumably as the

224

Figure 8. Plot A show the percentage overlap in
devices detected between two participants’
Bluetooth scan logs over time. Plot B shows
device density over the same period.

5. Ongoing and future work
This project is still ongoing, and we are exploring
several potential means of extending this work. We are
integrating a wider variety of system log data, generated
by a standard library for logging and networking that lets
programmers send log data from multiple mobile devices
back to visualisation tools on a central server.
Also, Section 4 discussed the analysis of crowd
density by location, with Figure 6 showing that a
combination of GPS and Bluetooth scan logs could draw
a participant’s journey coloured by the crowd density at
each part of the route. By enlisting more participants, this
technique could be extended to cover a wider
geographical area than a single person’s journey, and
results could be averaged, creating a heat map of the
form of those seen in [6], showing crowds at different
parts of a city. Such a tool could also include a timeline
slider control, allowing analysis of crowd sizes at
different times of the day.
We have also begun exploring a mechanism for
classifying activity based on the logs of Bluetooth scans.
Data is first divided temporally into a series of periods of
equal duration. Properties of the scan logs for each of
these periods (such as the number of unique devices seen
or lost, the average duration a device stayed in view, and
so on) can then be used to create an x-dimensional vector
for each period (with x equal to the number of properties
used). Clustering or machine learning routines can then
be performed on this set of vectors, to begin to classify
the activity of the participant at different times.
Figure 9 shows an example, where Bluetooth scan
logs have been passed to a clustering routine and the
cluster membership outputs have been used to colour the
background of the BTvis component. In this example, kmeans [11] clustering has been employed, seeded to
detect 3 different clusters. It appears that this process has
been quite successful in roughly differentiating periods at
which the participant was travelling (background
coloured purple), sitting during the match (grey) and
moving through crowds during entry or exit to the
stadium or at half time (pink). Interestingly, a brief trip
to the refreshment stands during the second half has been
detected and correctly coloured pink.

Figure 7. Bluetooth scan results for two
participants at the same event are coloured blue
and red respectively. In A, bars are filtered out
(coloured grey) if a device was only detected by
one of the participants over the course of the
trial. In B, a bar is filtered unless both
participants detected the device concurrently.
The remaining bars show the many devices that
might
potentially
be
used
for
either
asynchronous (A) or synchronous (B) 2-hop
MANET communication.
More precisely, despite attending the match
together, participant X’s device detected participant Y’s
device only 38% of the time, i.e. a MANET could be
used for fast direct single-hop communication for only
38% of the time. However, of the periods where the
participants could not detect each other, there were other
devices detected concurrently by both participants 57%
of the time, which could be used for (almost as fast) 2hop communication, i.e. fast network connections
involving either 1 or 2 hops could potentially be made
74% of the time. In the remaining 26% of the time, two
devices could either simply wait, or could try to use
asynchronous ‘store and forward’ communication via the
very many devices that were detected by both but not at
the same time.
We note also that such co-occurrence statistics
percentages could be used to explore the reliability of
device detection, with visualisation adding potential
richer detail to the results. For example, one participant
could carry two devices in the same pocket, both running
the scanner, and compare the overlap in the two devices’
log files. A high degree of variance between the two logs
would suggest excessive unreliability in device detection.

225

classifications of Bluetooth scans, and for resources
supporting MANET-based applications in this setting.
While single-hop communications between people
attending the match together may be available for less
than 40% of the time, connections involving either 1 or 2
hops may be available almost 75% of the time. Our
application design work is therefore directed towards
applications that use such multihop connections, as we
explore in which locations and in which social
interactions such connections might be feasible and
desirable.

Acknowledgements

Figure 9. Bluetooth scan data has been
clustered (shown as the different background
colours) to classify different types of activity.

We would like to acknowledge the contribution by
the other members of the SUM group at Glasgow in
helping with the capture of the data presented.
This work was funded by the UK EPSRC
(EP/E04848X/1).

This area has promise, not only in aiding the
analysis of such data sets, but also for use in mobile
applications. For instance, an application could
automatically create a diary entry at the end of a day,
giving times and loose descriptions of actions as a
starting point for a blog entry, or a mobile device could
perform this classification in real time and offer contextbased services based on the owner’s current class of
activity. This work is still at an early stage and, although
results look promising, more data is required before we
can make statements about accuracy of classification, or
make more authoritative statements about the types of
activity that can be detected or differentiated.

References
[1]

M Esbjörnsson, B Brown, O Juhlin, D Normark.
Watching the cars go round and round: designing for
active spectating at sports events. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing
systems. 1221-1224. 2006.
[2] I Akyildiz, X Wang, W Wang. Wireless mesh networks:
a survey, Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 47(4),
445-487. 2005.
[3] A Morrison, P Tennent, M Chalmers. Coordinated
Visualisation of Video and System Log Data.
Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization. 91 – 102. 2006
[4] E O’Neill, V Kostakos, T Kindberg, A Penn, S Fraser, T
Jones. Instrumenting the city: developing methods for
observing and understanding the digital cityscape.
Ubiquitous Computing. 315-332. 2006.
[5] C Greenhalgh, A French, P Tennent, J Humble. From
ReplayTool to Digital Replay System. 3rd International
Conference on e-Social Science. 2007.
[6] J Reades, F Calabrese, A Sevtsuk, C Ratti. Cellular
Census: Explorations in Urban Data Collection.
Pervasive Computing. 6 (3). 30-38. 2007.
[7] Crawdad. url: http://crawdad.cs.dartmouth.edu/index.php
[8] A Chaintreau, P Hui, J Crowcroft, C Diot, R Gass, J
Scott. Impact of Human Mobility on the Design of
Opportunistic Forwarding Algorithms. 25th IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications.
1-13. 2006.
[9] E Yoneki. Visualizing communities and centralities from
encounter traces. Proceedings of the third ACM
workshop on Challenged networks. 2008.
[10] Google Earth. url: http://earth.google.com
[11] J MacQueen. Some methods for classification and
analysis of multivariate observations. Proceedings of the
5th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematics and
Probability. 281-297. 1967.

Conclusions
This work is part of the initial phase of a project
seeking to design novel mobile applications for use by
spectators at stadium-based sporting events. In studying
the data collected by such spectators, analysts can
examine a spectator’s role and behaviour within a crowd
through the exploration of Bluetooth device detection
data, and view a participant’s experience in terms of
features such as crowd density, location and speed of
travel. In designing the analysis tool based on a set of
coordinated visualisation components, analysts can
inspect different views side-by-side and cross-reference
data by any combination of these features. In ongoing
work, we continue to extend and integrate our analysis
tools, exploring new clustering approaches and also
integration of system logs.
By developing insight into the spectators’ patterns of
activity and the technological resources available to the
individual by his/her movement among and membership
of a crowd, the presented visualisation software has
helped us make design decisions for novel mobile
applications based on MANETs and wireless mesh
networking. Such insight is particularly valuable as this
area of application design is in its infancy. Our initial
analyses offer quantitative evidence that there is some
potential for context-based applications based on

226

