2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Securing the Web Using Human Perception and Visual Object Interpretation
Amalia Rusu and Rebecca Docimo
Fairfield University
arusu@mail.fairfield.edu, s_rdocimo@stagweb.fairfield.edu
finish the task), effectiveness (user ability to accomplish
the task), appeal (how well users like the system), and
safety (data protection) [19].
Perception and visual interpretation are two essential
aspects of human performance that are relevant to
information visualization. Visualization is a human
cognitive activity and a result of looking at an image,
diagram, textual information, etc. Visualization enables
us to see things that otherwise cannot be seen. Designing
good visualizations and Web materials requires
knowledge about how people perceive things. In this
context we will introduce constructivist theory and
mental models which consider that our brains do not
create pixel-by-pixel images. Rather, our minds create,
or construct, models that summarize what comes from
our senses. Moreover, when we see something, we do
not remember all the details, only those that have
meaning for us. Context plays a major role in what
people see in an image and the combination of factors
that we know and bring to a situation (mind set) can have
a profound effect on the usability of visualization such as
a Web site [21].
In this paper we focus on the goals of user-centered
design to create better Human Interactive Proofs (HIPs)
systems to secure Web applications, as similar aims exist
for effective CAPTCHA design [11]. Central to the new
Shape and Tree CAPTCHAs we detail is the use of
specific principles of cognitive psychology to transform
the image objects aid human solving while foiling
machine recognition. We begin by motivating our
development of new CAPTCHAs and describe the
cognitive principles in more detail before discussing their
use on the specific CAPTCHAs developed. We end by
presenting usability and security results for our new
CAPTCHAs.

Abstract
Being motivated by the need for usable Web security
systems, we present in this paper new image-based
CAPTCHA systems that overcome the weaknesses of
commercial CAPTCHAs. We describe Tree and Shape
CAPTCHAs in addition to handwritten CAPTCHAs that
feature visual objects transformed according to specific
principles
of
cognitive
psychology.
These
transformations, in addition to other security measures
we describe, ensure that our CAPTCHAs are easily
interpretable by humans but not by machines. We seek
not only to provide useful CAPTCHAs, but to offer
important insights into such fields as Information
Visualization, Human-Computer Interaction, etc. Early
testing results indicate that users find our CAPTCHAs an
attractive alternative to text-based CAPTCHAs and are
readily able to solve them based on cognitive abilities.
Conversely, machine recognition is low due to the
current inability to make use of these cognitive aids, thus
making our CAPTCHAs a viable solution for cyber
security.

1. Introduction
The World Wide Web (WWW) is different than
most traditional information systems. While most
applications (e.g., data entry, report generation, hardware
testing) have very specific groups of users that undergo
specific training, WWW users comprise a very broad
group without the benefit of a single, comprehensive user
manual. Because of the lack of a specific context or
instructions, Web usage relies heavily on human
cognition, content of a website, and well-constructed
clues given to users. User-centered development
methodologies are therefore essential for creating web
applications.
These
techniques
are
highly
interdisciplinary and include knowledge and methods
from many disciplines, such as Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI), Information Visualization, Cognitive
Science, Psychology, Artificial Intelligence, Image
Analysis, and Security. Goals for user-centric web
applications include usability (easy of use), utility
(services provided), efficiency (how quick users can
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.48

2. Motivation for using HIPs to protect web
services
A HIP system seeks to distinguish one class of users
from another, such as humans from machines, in an
online environment without prior knowledge of
passwords or use of biometrics [6]. CAPTCHA
(Completely Automated Public Turing tests to tell
Computers and Humans Apart) is used by HIPs systems
619
613

language, they are useful to a worldwide audience. The
use of transformations related to human cognition and
perception allows for easy use by humans while
hindering bots from solving the puzzles. Our reliance on
cognitive principles to help humans sets our work apart
from many other CAPTCHAs.

(Figure 1). CAPTCHAs distinguish humans from bots by
being passable by the former, but not by the latter [17].
CAPTCHAs are typically implemented as small textbased puzzles (handwritten or machine-printed) that
require humans to solve them on a pass-fail basis. If the
user passes, they are considered to be human and are
given access to the requested web service; otherwise they
are assumed to be an automated program or “ bot”, and
are denied access.

3. Designing better CAPTCHAs using the
Gestalt laws of perception and Geon theory
of pattern recognition
Gestalt psychology follows from the constructivist
school of thought briefly introduced in Section 1. This
school of thought motivates the transformations we make
to our CAPTCHAs to preserve legibility for humans
while preventing bots from solving them. From the
German “Gestalt” for “shape”, this discipline is based on
the observation that we often experience things that are
not part of our simple sensations [16]. Gestalt
psychology also says that humans see objects in relation
to other objects, rather than in isolation. Humans tend to
group objects to understand them by looking at what they
have in common and their physical locations from each
other. Several principles dictate how objects are given
meaning. Proximity allows humans to see items that are
physically proximate as being related, while similarity
causes us to implicitly form objects into groups based on
what they have in common visually. Symmetry allows us
to see an object as a whole rather than to see it for its
parts; continuity causes us to group items based on the
flow of lines or alignment. Closure is what allows us to
interpret an object properly, even if a piece of it is
missing. Our mind fills in the blanks. Familiarity refers
to how elements are more likely to be seen as a group if
they appear familiar, while figure-ground distinction
involves organization and grouping as well as dividing
an object into the foreground (the area of focus) and its
background. As mentioned previously, context and
memory also play an important role in how humans
interpret visual objects [21].
The Geon theory of pattern recognition (or
recognition by components) dictates which core
components must be left in an image so that it is still
interpretable by humans [7]. Geons are simple structures
such as cylinders, cubes, spheres and wedges. Two key
aspects of geons are edges and intersections. The
importance of these has been tested on images where
various parts were deleted. The careful preservation of
edges and intersections seems to be critical for human
recognition [9]. In general, object recognition for humans
is easy if an object’s geons can be visualized and
recognized. Geon theory helps to explain why humans
can still make sense of objects requiring different
viewpoints, even if they have not been used previously
[8]. This allows humans to interpret images even if they
have been changed from the size or orientation that they
are familiar with.
We leverage Gestalt principles and Geon theory in
creation of our HIP systems by making very specific
transformations to the image components used. For

Figure 1. Example of Handwritten CAPTCHA
CAPTCHAs have become standard practice on the
Web to protect Web services (such as email account
creation) from abuse by automated programs. Creation of
new CAPTCHAs is an active area of research but many
CAPTCHAs are not viable because they are either not
usable by humans or are not secure enough against
machines [22]. Research is also active on breaking OCRbased CAPTCHAs and various such CAPTCHAs have
been broken [5], [12], [15]. Usability issues typically
arise from attempting to make CAPTCHAs more secure
against machines.
Different schemes have been proposed to help
ensure usability of CAPTCHAs, specifically of textbased CAPTCHAs [11], [14]. In addition, image-based
CAPTCHAs have been created to overcome usability
issues as well as to prevent OCR-based solving. A few
examples from earliest to most recent are PIX [17],
ArtiFacial [22] and Asirra [10]. However, some of these
image-based CAPTCHAs have been readily broken [20].
In addition, various criticisms, such as the reliance on
large databases of images, have been leveled at imagebased CAPTCHAs. Large image databases are both
expensive to create and maintain and they defy the basic
notion of what a CAPTCHA should be [17].
We propose several new image-based CAPTCHAs
that overcome the issues inherent in many existing
CAPTCHAs. We describe a Tree and a Shape
CAPTCHA that take into consideration information
visualization aspects and are altered according to Gestalt
principles and Geon theory. We are motivated to use
cognitive principles based on the success in using them
in earlier work for handwritten CAPTCHAs [1], [2]. The
Tree and Shape CAPTCHAs require no database and can
quickly and easily be drawn on the screen using little
space. The tree and shape drawings can automatically be
generated in virtually infinite quantities using a fairly
simple program. Since they are not tied to any particular

614
620

instance, deleting part of an object is useful because
humans can reconstruct it due to their cognitive ability as
long as key features as described by Geon theory are
intact. In Figure 3 we show examples of applying
specific transformations. We describe next the specific
transformations we apply to the image objects in our
CAPTCHAs and the principles at play that allow humans
to reconstruct the visual objects for easy interpretation.

•
•

•
•

Transformation: use empty or broken objects, rough
contours or fragmentation. Laws at play are: closure,
proximity, continuity and figure-ground (Figure 2c).
Transformation: split the image into parts and
displace or spread the parts as a mosaic effect.
Principles used are: closure, proximity, continuity
and symmetry (Figure 2e).
Transformation: add extra strokes. Laws at play are:
familiarity and figure-ground (Figure 2g).
Transformation: change an object’s orientation or
stretch or compress it. Principles used are: memory,
internal metrics, familiarity of objects and
orientation (Figure 2h).

By using the transformations described above and
by relying on the principles that help to ensure proper
visual reconstruction of the images by humans, we
maximize the gap in the abilities between humans and
machines to create efficient CAPTCHAs. These same
transformations help to ensure that machines cannot
readily solve our CAPTCHAs as they currently lack the
basic cognitive skills present in humans. Unsuccessful
attempts have been made to apply feature analytic (geon)
approaches to machine recognition of handwriting.
While human perception can rely on structural
information and geons for recognition, computer
programs have not been able to successfully apply this
theory [13].

4. Cognition-based HIPs systems
We propose several new CAPTCHAs as a better
alternative to broken commercial CAPTCHAs. These
systems exploit human strengths over machines in
interpreting imperfect visual objects and follow from
earlier work on Gestalt and Geon transformed
handwritten CAPTCHAs [1], [2]. What all of our
CAPTCHAs share are the underlying concepts used for
designing specific visual transformations, namely Gestalt
and Geon principles. These principles could successfully
be applied to any shape in general, and in particular to
handwritten text, tree drawings, or familiar geometric
shapes.

Figure 2. Visualizations transformed according
to cognitive principles
•
•

•

•

Transformation: create horizontal or vertical
overlaps. Laws at play are: proximity, symmetry,
familiarity, continuity and figure-ground (Figure 2f).
Transformation: use circular, rectangular or linear
occlusions in the same color as the background.
Laws at play are: closure, proximity, continuity and
familiarity (Figure 2b).
Transformation: add occlusions by waves from left
to right in the same color as the background.
Principles helping humans reconstruct the images
are: closure, proximity and continuity (Figure 2a).
Transformation: add occlusions of the same color as
the foreground. Principles used are: familiarity and
figure-ground (Figure 2d).

4.1. Handwritten CAPTCHA
In the Handwritten CAPTCHAs, Gestalt and Geon
related transformations are applied to handwriting
samples to prevent machine recognition. These
CAPTCHAs feature handwritten words as HIP
challenges. Several handwritten words that have been
transformed and have proven to pose problems to
machine but not to human recognition are shown in
Figure 2. Motivation for this CAPTCHA type is the high
rate of breaking of OCR-based machine printed text
CAPTCHAs [5], [12], [15] as well as the continued
difficulty of machines in reading handwritten text.
Problems faced in machine-printed text such as letter or
word segmentation are even worse for unconstrained
handwritten words [3], especially in the absence of

615
621

context. In addition, humans have a unique skill, learned
from an early age, at interpreting handwriting despite its
condition (i.e., rotated or occluded). We have found that
when applying transforms that take advantage of human
cognition, machine recognition rates are very poor while
human recognition does not suffer [1], [2]. These
findings motivate the use of the same types of transforms
in our new Tree and Shape CAPTCHAs.

4.2. Tree CAPTCHA
This CAPTCHA presents the user a challenge in the
form of a basic tree drawn with nodes and edges. Edges
may form into bends or intersections. At each node, a
symbol is placed. The tree is occluded using Gestalt and
Geon transformations such as by applying occlusions
(Figure 2b, Figure 3a), horizontal or vertical overlaps
(Figure 2f, Figure 3b) or extra strokes in the foreground
color (Figure 2d, Figure 3a), etc. Other features to
present additional difficulty for machines, such as the use
of color [4] may be added, as in Figure 3b. Use of
transformations and other features such as color helps to
ensure that the tree is easily readable for humans while it
foils machine recognition. Despite being a construct in
Computer Science, trees are basic visual structures and
something that humans outside the domain are generally
familiar with or at least able to interpret easily with no
additional training.
To solve the CAPTCHA, users are asked to respond
to a question about the tree or to take some specific
action, such as to click on all instances of a particular
item. The asking question will vary. To pass the
CAPTCHA, all clicks must be correct. If any click is not
correct, the user fails. This helps to ensure that machines
cannot solve the CAPTCHA by guessing. A correct
guess requires getting p (the number of instances of the
item of interest) times the number of (x,y) potential
correct locations. For each click, the (x,y) locations could
be anywhere within the given screen area, with an m x n
probability of guessing, where m and n are the width and
height of the image in pixels. Two examples of Treebased CAPTCHA are shown in Figure 3. In Figure 3a we
apply occlusions in the same pixel color as the
background and add extra strokes in the same pixel color
as the foreground. In Figure 3b we transform the tree by
using overlaps. We may add the use of color for
additional complexity, an area known to add difficulty
for machine recognition [4]. The tree can feature any
combination of transformations, as in Section 3.

(a)

(b)
Figure 3. Examples of Tree CAPTCHAs

4.3. Shape CAPTCHA
In this CAPTCHA, various transformed shapes are
drawn on the screen and transformed according to
Gestalt and Geon principles. To solve the CAPTCHA,
the user must answer the question asked, for example, by
dragging several shapes into other shapes or by clicking
on certain shapes. The asking question will vary for each
instance of the CAPTCHA. Transformations applied to
the shapes will be randomly selected to prevent machine
learning and solving of the CAPTCHA. One instance of
this type of CAPTCHA is shown in Figure 4. Any
transformation described in Section 3 could be applied.
Based on the success in using them in handwritten
CAPTCHAs [1], [2], the Tree and Shape CAPTCHAs
also utilize the Gestalt and Geon principles to transform
image objects. The development of the latter
CAPTCHAs is motivated by the need for a general
language-independent CAPTCHA that can be useful
worldwide and one that is not prone to the issues of

616
622

found our CAPTCHAs to be good candidates for further
development and testing. When presented with our
prototype, all students felt they would be able to quickly
and easily solve our CAPTCHAs. Feedback we received
shows that users appreciate having a non-text based
CAPTCHA as they struggle with harder to interpret text
which is needed to foil ever advancing OCR techniques.
One finding of particular interest was that almost half of
them would prefer answering a graphical CAPTCHA
over a text-based CAPTCHA. We believe that the nonnative English speakers in our test group may account for
this result. Also most of the students presented with our
CAPTCHAs rated them “as good as existing text-based
CAPTCHAs” or “better than existing text-based
CAPTCHAs”. Further testing and user studies will help
us to understand the results better and to improve our
CAPTCHAs.
Machine recognition of our CAPTCHA is hindered
by not having a specific domain context to rely on to
segment the image. Domain context is very important in
parsing the images [18]. In addition, our use of color
may add extra difficulty for machines [4]. Our use of
Gestalt and Geon principles to transform visual objects
in our CAPTCHAs presents additional difficulty for
machines as they lack basic human cognitive skill [13],
while allowing humans to interpret the images properly,
and the results for handwritten images have proven that.
For example, testing of over 4,000 handwritten city name
images on three state-of-the-art handwriting recognizers
yielded machine accuracies of only 1.21 ÷ 5.74%.
Accuracies approached 0% for certain individual
transformations such as letter fragmentations, overlaps,
or adding extra strokes. These same transformations
presented the least difficulty for human subjects, based
on the Gestalt laws of closure and continuity [1], [2].
By moving from handwriting to trees and shapes (or
graphics in general) we are transferring the recognition
problem to an even larger problem domain where
machine recognition is low while at the same time strong
for humans because of cognitive abilities. Our
CAPTCHAs do not rely on a single domain context that
could be used for training which presents problems for
machine recognition [4]. Training for various tools may
be limited to the use of specific examples, or shapes, in a
narrow context [18]. Our CAPTCHA generation tool can
generate virtually infinitely many image challenges since
all components including questions, visual objects
drawn, and transforms applied are randomly selected at
the time the CAPTCHA is rendered on the screen. In
addition, tools may also perform very poorly when
overlapping or intersecting of different objects occurs, or
missing parts around the important drawing features such
as nodes or intersections [23]. Since the execution time
for a potential automatic recognition tool increases as the
image complexity increases (due to all the overlaps,
fragmentations and intersections) the time to solve would
likely be too long to be useful in an online environment.
Our CAPTCHAs heavily leverage this weakness as we
exploit and utilize those kinds of transformations on
purpose. The objects can, however, be interpreted

many existing OCR-based CAPTCHAs [5], [12], [15].
Beyond their usefulness in securing web applications, the
insights CAPTCHAs can provide to research fields is
always an important component. For instance they
typically provide important insights for the field of
Artificial Intelligence. If humans but not machines are
successful in passing, CAPTCHAs continue to be useful
to protect web services. If computer programs succeed at
passing, yet another challenge in Artificial Intelligence
has been solved [17].

Figure 4. Example of Shape CAPTCHA

5. Usability and security discussion analysis
In addition to discussing existing Handwritten
CAPTCHAs, in this paper we have introduced new
image-based CAPTCHAs to overcome the difficulties of
existing CAPTCHAs, such as reliance on large and
expensive databases of images, the need for large
amounts of screen real estate and the various techniques
available in breaking OCR-based CAPTCHAs [5], [12],
[15]. Our CAPTCHAs do not require large databases of
images as infinitely many randomly generated unique
CAPTCHAs can be created on demand using a
straightforward program. All components of the
CAPTCHA are randomly generated including the
question asked to the user, the shapes or tree drawn and
the transformations applied to the visual objects.
Randomizing several components in our CAPTCHAs at
once makes machine learning more difficult. Other
benefits of our CAPTCHAs include being able to render
them in a small amount of screen space. The HIPs can
also be used by a wide range of people of most any age
across the world as no specific pre-existing knowledge is
required to interpret and solve them. The ability to
understand shapes and basic graph structures is
something that most humans can do easily due to
cognitive abilities [21].
Based on results of preliminary proof-of-concept
testing on a small group of graduate students, we have

617
623

properly by humans due to the Gestalt principles and
Geon theory of shape recognition. Due to the current
weaknesses in state-of-the-art machine recognition
systems of general drawings, we believe that there is no
tool that can effectively interact with or solve our various
CAPTCHAs.

[7]

[8]

6. Conclusions
[9]

In this paper we have presented several image-based
CAPTCHAs that overcome both the usability and
security difficulties of other broken commercial
CAPTCHAs. Our CAPTCHAs feature visual objects
transformed according to Gestalt and Geon principles.
We exploit these principles to ensure that our
CAPTCHAs are readable by humans, but not by
machines. We are motivated by previous results showing
very poor performance of machines on handwritten
images using similar image transformations [1], [2]. We
also leverage continuing weaknesses in machine
recognition of non-domain specific images [4], [18].
Early test results show not only that humans feel they
can easily solve our CAPTCHAs, but that they feel
positive about them. For these reasons, we believe that
our CAPTCHAs are a valuable contribution both as
secure and usable CAPTCHAs and for the insights they
provide in areas such as Information Visualization,
Artificial Intelligence and others. There are various
extensions to our approach which might be used to create
additional CAPTCHAs to prevent the abuse of web
services by automated programs. Combining handwritten
text images with images of objects is another possible
application. We believe that additional testing and user
feedback will offer even more insight and possible
enhancements.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

7. References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[18]

A. Rusu and V. Govindaraju, “Visual CAPTCHA with
Handwritten Image Analysis”, LNCS, vol. 3517,
Springer, Berlin / Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 42-51.
A. Rusu and V. Govindaraju, “A Human Interactive
Proof Algorithm Using Handwriting Recognition”, Proc.
Eighth International Conference on Document Analysis
and Recognition, 2:29, IEEE Press, Washington, D.C.,
2005, pp. 967-971.
A.W. Senior and A.J. Robinson, “An Off-Line Cursive
Handwriting Recognition System”, IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 20:3,
Washington, D.C., 1998, pp. 309-321.
Chaudhuri, B., Digital Document Processing: Major
Directions and Recent Advances, Springer, London,
2007.
G. Mori and J. Malik, “Recognizing Objects in
Adversarial Clutter: Breaking a Visual CAPTCHA”,
Proc. 2003 IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, vol. 1, IEEE Press, Washington, D.C.,
2003, pp. I-134-I-141.
H. Baird and K. Popat, “Human Interactive Proofs and
Document Image Analysis”, LNCS, vol. 2423, Springer,
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2002, pp. 507-518.

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

618
624

I. Biederman, “Recognition-by-Components: A Theory
of Human Image Understanding”, Psychological Review,
94:2, American Psychological Association, 1987, pp.
115-147.
I. Biederman and P.C. Gerhardstein, “Recognizing
Depth-Rotated Objects: Evidence and Conditions for
Three-Dimensional Viewpoint Invariance”, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 19, 1993, pp. 1162-1182.
I. Biederman and T. Blickle, “The perception of objects
with deleted contours”, unpublished manuscript, 1985.
J. Elson, J. R. Douceur, J. Howell, and J. Saul, “Asirra: A
CAPTCHA that Exploits Interest-Aligned Manual Image
Categorization”, Proc. Computer and Communications
Security Conference 2007, ACM, New York, 2007, pp.
366-374.
J. Yan and A.S El Ahmad, “Usability of CAPTCHAs Or
usability issues in CAPTCHA design”, Proc. Symposium
On Usable Privacy and Security 2008, ACM, New York,
2008, pp. 44-52.
J. Yan and A.S. El Ahmad, “A Low-cost Attack on a
Microsoft
CAPTCHA”,
Proc.
Computer
and
Communications Security Conference 2008, ACM, New
York, 2008, pp. 543-554.
J.J. Freyd, “Dynamic Mental Representation”,
Psychological Review, 94, American Psychological
Association, 1987, pp. 427-438.
K. Chellapilla, K. Larson, P. Simard, and M. Czerwinski,
“Designing Human Friendly Human Interaction Proofs
(HIPs)”, Proc. CHI 2005, ACM, New York, 2005, pp.
711-720.
K. Chellapilla and P. Simard, “Using Machine Learning
to Break Visual Human Interaction Proofs (HIPs)”, Proc.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
2004, vol. 17, 2004.
Koffka, K., “Principles of Gestalt Psychology”, Harcourt
Brace, New York, 1935.
L. von Ahn, M. Blum and J. Langford, “Telling humans
and computers apart automatically”, Commun. ACM,
47:2, New York, 2004, pp. 56-60.
L. Yan and L. Wenyin, “Engineering Drawings
Recognition Using a Case-based Approach”, Proc.
Seventh International Conference on Document Analysis
and Recognition. IEEE Press, Washington, D.C., 2003,
pp. 1-5.
McCracken, D.D., R.J. Wolfe, and J.M. Spool, “UserCentered Web Development: A Human-Computer
Interaction Approach”, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 2003.
P. Golle, “Machine Learning Attacks Against the Asirra
CAPTCHA”, Proc. Computer and Communications
Security Conference 2008, ACM, New York, 2008, pp.
535-542.
Pearrow, M., Web Site Usability Handbook, Charles
River Media, Rockland, MA, 2000, p. 36.
Y. Rui and Z. Liu, “ARTiFACIAL: Automated Reverse
Turing Test Using Facial Features”, Proc. 11th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia 2003, ACM,
New York, 2003, pp. 295-298.
Z. Li, “Generalized Hough Transform: Fast Detection for
Hybrid-Multi-Circle and Multi-Rectangle”, Proc. 6th
World Congress on Control and Automation, IEEE
Press, Washington, D.C., 2006, pp. 10130-10134.

