2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Real-World User Evaluations of a Visual and Interactive Web Search Interface
Orland Hoeber
Department of Computer Science
Memorial University
St. John’s, NL, Canada A1B 3X5
hoeber@cs.mun.ca

Daniel Schroeder and Michael Brooks
Department of Computer Science
University of Regina
Regina, SK, Canada S4S 0A2
{schroedd, brooks1m}@cs.uregina.ca

Abstract

search interface designed to support the human elements of
searching through the use of lightweight visual enhancements to the commonly-used list-based representation of
Web search results. Information that can assist searchers
in their Web search tasks is presented in a visual manner.
The system supports user interaction both during query refinement and search results exploration processes.
In this paper, we provide a brief overview of the features
of TheHotMap.com (see Figure 1, and [11] for more details). The system is a re-implementation and extension of
some of our previously published research prototypes for
visual and interactive Web search [12, 13]. The goal is
to employ easy-to-use interface elements that allow users
to visually interpret and make sense of the fundamental
Web search information, and take an active role in the Web
search process, when necessary.
The primary contributions of this paper include the longitudinal research methodology, and the results from realworld user evaluations conducted over a four-week period.
Our focus is not only on how the features of the system are
being used, but also the participants’ impressions of usefulness and ease of use. We contend that the utility of a visual
element in an interactive interface is closely related to its
effectiveness in visually representing the underlying data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. An
overview of related work is provided in Section 2. A brief
summary of the features of theHotM ap.com are outlined
in Section 3. Section 4 describes the longitudinal research
methodology used in this study. Section 5 presents the results of the study. Conclusions and future work are discussed in Section 6.

Although laboratory user studies are the most common
method for validating the utility of information visualization systems, it may be difficult to determine if such studies accurately reflect the tasks of real users. In this paper, we describe a longitudinal real-world user evaluation
of a visual and interactive Web search interface designed
to support exploratory searching: theHotM ap.com. Although we experienced some attrition during the course of
the four-week study, the results indicate that many of the
features of the system are beneficial and useful in real-world
use. Although exploratory search comprised a small portion of the total search activities undertaken, the features
of theHotM ap.com which support query refinement and
search results exploration did not interfere with the more
common targeted searching tasks. As a result, most participants indicated that they found the system useful and easy
to use.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the technologies underpinning Web
search engines have matured to the point that Web search is
considered by many to be a solved problem. However, the
interfaces used by the top search engines have changed very
little in this time. While a simple query box and a ranked
list of search results may be all that is needed for targeted
searches, these interfaces do not adequately meet the needs
of searchers in many other situations (e.g., when their goal
is not well defined or ambiguous, or when there is a desire
to explore the breadth of information available for a specific
topic).
For such search tasks, providing visual and interactive
support for the fundamental activities of crafting a query
and exploring the search results has the potential to greatly
improve the ability of searchers to find the information they
are seeking. T heHotM ap.com is a publicly available Web
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.20

2

Related Work

The system under evaluation in this study is based on
a combination of two of our previous research prototypes:
HotMap [13] and Wordbars [12]. Both of these prototypes
were originally developed with the purpose of exploring visual representations and the use of various types of informa119

query term header
The search results
list can be re-sorted
by clicking on
buttons in the query
term headers.

term histogram
The term histogram
visually represents
the common terms
in the search results
set, and can be used
to both re-sort the
search results and
refine the query.

abstract overview
The frequency of
the query terms in
the search results
set is visually
depicted in the
abstract overview.

Figure 1. A screenshot of T heHotM ap.com. Note the lightweight controls labeled in the figure.
tion to support Web search activities. As research tools, the
prototypes were useful for validating the potential utility of
the proposed techniques [14, 15]. However, they were not
designed for public use. T heHotM ap.com is a complete
re-implementation and extension of the methods described
in these previous works.
Others have explored the use of visual interfaces to support the exploration of Web search results. Heimonen and
Jhaveri [9] created an icon-based representation of the location of specific query terms within individual search results sets. Based on TileBars [8], this system allowed
the searcher to see where in the resulting documents their
search terms were being used together.
In VIEWER [2], the frequency of all combinations of the
query terms were counted within the document surrogates.
This information was presented in a histogram representation. Selection within the histogram allowed the searcher to
filter the search results set based on specific combinations
of the query terms.
Web search clustering systems, such as Clusty [4] and
Grokker [7], dynamically identify and label clusters of documents discovered within the search results sets. Normally
presented as a tree-based representation, users can expand
and select clusters, resulting in a filtering of the search results set. Kules [18] extended the standard paradigm for
clustering search engines by providing consistent naming
of the clusters. The result is a system that allows users to
learn the names and meanings of the clusters over time.

In terms of supporting users in crafting accurate Web
search queries, very little work has been done. Joho et al.
[17] developed a method for dynamically generating a hierarchy of potentially useful terms for query expansion, and
presented these in a menu-like structure. Although the focus is on filtering RSS feeds, VisGets [6] provides a set of
coordinated visual representations designed to support the
searcher in dynamically refining their query. Some of the
top search engines and Web browsers have begun to address
this issue by suggesting potential queries based on their usage logs. This feature appears in both Ask [1] and Yahoo
[22], as well the Firefox [19] Web search bar.

3

theHotMap.com

The version of theHotM ap.com tested in this study is
implemented as a Web search interface layer overtop of the
search results provided by the Yahoo API [21]. There are
three main features that enable flexible interaction within
the system: the term histogram, the re-sortable search results list using the query term headers, and the abstract
overview of the full search results set (see Figure 1). These
features were selected and refined based on the results of
user studies conducted with the original HotMap and WordBars prototypes [14, 15].
The term histogram provides a visual representation of
the most frequently appearing terms within the search results set (using the title, snippet, and URL), allowing the rel-

120

ative frequency of these terms to be easily observed. Users
can interactively re-sort the search results set by selecting
the arrow icon beside any term of interest. Interactive query
refinement is supported by clicking the plus icon beside any
term users wishes to add to their queries, or the minus icon
beside any term users wish to remove from the query.
In addition to the re-sorting supported via the term histogram, searchers may also re-sort the search results based
on the use of their specific query terms. Clicking on any
of the query term headers above the search results list will
cause the search results to be re-sorted based on the use of
the selected term within the titles, snippets and URLs. Although the default sorting method is to perform single-term
sorting, an advanced feature is available that supports nested
sorting.
The abstract overview provides a compact visual representation of the entire set of search results that are presented
in the list-based representation. In the current implementation, the system collects 50 search results per page. Colour
coding is used to represent the frequency of the query terms
within the search results overview. This same colour coding
is also used in the search results list. The abstract overview
supports an interactive exploration of the search results. As
users visually identify documents of interest, they may click
on the abstract representation of the search result to cause
the search results list to scroll to that location. The system temporarily highlights the corresponding search result
that was selected in the abstract overview, allowing users to
easily relate their selection in the overview to the scrolled
location in the search results list.

4

Data collection methods may include logging the usage
activities of the participants, administering questionnaires,
conducting interviews, and/or conducting focus groups.
The usage logs allow the data to be collected remotely and
automatically. Daily, biweekly, or weekly questionnaires
(perhaps administered online) allow the subjective reactions
of the participants to be measured throughout the course of
the study. Interviews and focus groups can also be conducted throughout the study period to capture qualitative
impressions on the utility of the system within the realworld setting.
Longitudinal studies are especially well-suited to the
evaluation of visual Web search interfaces. Since searching
the Web is the type of activity that occurs in the workplace,
school, and home, and at various times throughout the day,
laboratory evaluations and field trials may not capture all aspects of use. Longitudinal studies provide valuable insight
into the utility of the visual representations and interaction
throughout the full breadth of Web search activities. More
details on benefits and drawbacks of longitudinal studies,
and how they can be used as part of a comprehensive evaluation methodology, can be found in [10].

4.2

This longitudinal study of the real-world use of
theHotM ap.com spanned a four-week period. At the beginning of the study, an information session was held to introduce the participants (n=13) to the system with a short
demonstration and explanation of the study procedures. A
pre-study questionnaire was administered to measure demographics and Web search behaviours. Each participant was
provided with a brochure outlining the key features of the
system.
Immediately following the information session, the participants were asked to start using a custom version of TheHotMap.com as their primary Web search engine for the
duration of three weeks. At the end of each week, an online
questionnaire was administered to gauge the participants’
impressions of the usefulness and ease of use of the system.
These questionnaires were based on the technology acceptance model [5].
After the third week of searching was completed, the participants were informed that they were no longer required
to use the system as their primary search engine. One week
later, the participants were invited to an exit session, during which a final questionnaire regarding the acceptance
of the system was administered. This final questionnaire
also included questions regarding the types of searches that
were conducted with the system, and whether the participants continued to use the system after the conclusion of
the required use period.
All the participants were financially compensated for

Real-World User Evaluations

Our previous studies on the research prototypes were
conducted in a controlled laboratory setting using preassigned exploratory search scenarios [14, 15]. Although
these tasks were designed to mimic a sub-class of real-world
search activities (e.g., exploratory searches), and were presented as simulated work tasks [3], one must always question how well they represent the types of searches normally
conducted. To address this concern, we have designed and
conducted a longitudinal evaluation of theHotM ap.com in
a real-world search setting.

4.1

Study Design

Longitudinal Research Methodology

Longitudinal studies are designed to allow participants to
engage in learning and using a system under investigation
over an extended period of time. Such studies may span
multiple days or weeks. During this time, the participants
make exclusive use of the system for all activities related to
the target tasks that are supported.

121

their participation in the study. Half of the compensation
was distributed at the information session; the other half
was distributed at the exit session.

4.3

Table 1. The number of unique queries submitted over the course of the study period.

Usage Logs
Unique Queries
Average Queries
per Participant

During the three week period in which the participants
were using the system as their primary Web search engine,
all the queries and use of the interactive features of the system were logged. Whenever the participants activated or
selected a feature of the system (e.g., submitting a query,
re-ordering the search results, adding a term to the query,
clicking on a search result, etc.), the relevant information
was sent back to the server via an AJAX request, where it
was matched to the activity session and stored in a usage
log.
A study design goal was to ensure that the system would
be used in as normal a manner as possible by the participants. To achieve this goal, we ensured the anonymity of the
participants by not requiring them to login or identify themselves to the system. Activity session cookies were used
to match an individual’s queries and interactions to one another. However, by design, it was not possible to match the
queries and interactions back to an individual participant.

5

5.2.2

Participants in this study were drawn from the undergraduate population of our university. Thirteen individuals
attended the information session and began the study. Nine
of these participants were male, four were female; nine were
studying science, three were studying engineering, and one
was studying arts. All participants self-reported a high degree of computer expertise, and all reported using Google
as their primary Web search engine. Eight of the participants reported conducting four or more searches per day,
three reported conducting three or more searches per day,
and two reported conducting two or fewer searches per day.
Over the course of the four weeks, two participants chose to
discontinue their involvement prior to the completion of the
study.

Usage Logs Analysis

5.2.1

Queries

Week 3
275
21

Re-Sorting Operations

There were two methods by which participants were able to
re-sort the search results: using the term histogram, and the
query term headers. Table 2 shows how many times these
re-sorting features were used during the study. Of the total number of unique queries during the three week search
period, in only 7% did the participants choose to make use
of the re-sorting operations. Clearly, the re-sorting features
were not used as heavily as we had anticipated. This may
have been due to a number of aspects including attrition,
fewer exploratory searches, and participants reverting to using the system like a non-interactive Web search engine.
Of particular interest is whether those who did use the resorting features were able to bring more relevant documents
to the top of the search results list. We measured this by
investigating which search results were viewed by the participants when re-sorting was involved. For each of these
search results, if it was moved higher in the list than the
underlying search engine would have dictated, we deemed
this a positive change. If it was moved lower in the list, we
deemed this a negative change. Table 3 shows the results of
this analysis.
In all but the third week, we can see a clear benefit to
the re-sorting operations. In almost all cases, search results
that were identified as potentially relevant by the participants (i.e., clicked) were moved to a higher location in the
search results list as a result of the re-sorting operations.
During the third week, the number of re-sorting operations
dwindled to a total of nine, producing mixed results in this
analysis.

Participant Demographics

5.2

Week 2
413
32

attrition, the participants still submitted a similar number of
queries per day (two to four) to what they reported in the
pre-study questionnaire.

Results and Analysis

5.1

Week 1
669
51

5.2.3

Query Refinement Operations

The term histogram provides searchers with the ability to
add or remove terms from the query with a single click. Table 4 shows the number of queries that were refined using
the system, as well as the number of queries that were manually refined. The manually refined queries were identified
as having at least one term in common with the previous

Table 1 shows the number of unique queries submitted during each of the three weeks of the study. Although our goal
was to keep the participants actively involved in the study
through the weekly questionnaires, there is a clear case of
attrition as the study progressed. However, even with this

122

Table 2. The number of re-sorting operations
initiated by the users, (in brackets are the
number of unique queries that were affected).

Term Histogram
Query Term Headers

Week 1
78 (22)
91 (38)

Week 2
43 (16)
44 (15)

Table 4. The number of refined queries using
the term histogram and manual refinement.

Week 3
5 (3)
4 (4)

Term Histogram
Manual Refinement

Positive Change
No Change
Negative Change

Week 2
34
0
3

Scroll
Jump

Week 3
2
0
2

query in the activity session, and with no use of the query
refinement operations in between.
The large number of manually refined queries (41% of
all the queries over the three week search period) is a noteworthy finding. This is nearly twice that of what has been
reported in studies of Web search engine logs [16]. We suspect that participants were recognizing relevant terms in the
term histogram, and manually adding these to their queries
rather than using the tools provided. A further analysis of
the phenomenon is warranted.

5.2.4

Week 2
10
180

Week 3
3
98

Table 5. The frequency of use of the scroll
and jump operations using the abstract
overview.

Table 3. The number of viewed search results
that were affected by the re-sorting of the
search results list.
Week 1
29
6
1

Week 1
36
280

Week 1
74
89

Week 2
9
6

5.3

Questionnaire Analysis

5.3.1

Usefulness and Ease of Use

Week 3
0
7

Our expectations while planning this longitudinal study was
that we would see a change in the responses as the participants became more familiar with the system. As one can
see from Figures 2 and 3, this was not the case. Clearly,
the participants were able to learn to use the system and become effective with it within the first week of use (prior to
completing the first questionnaire).
Of special note is the third question in Figure 2 pertaining to the productivity of the searcher. Here, we see a steady
positive increase over the three weeks of the study, and then
a significant drop once the participants were no longer required to use the system (in this case, nearly half of the
participants indicated disagreement with the statement). A
similar drop can be seen in the last questions in both Figures. Our intuition is that this drop is a result of participants
recalling the negative aspects of their experiences with the
system more readily than the positive aspects.
In general, the responses to the questionnaire were positive. There was a strong neutral bias to the questions regarding the usefulness of the system. However, this bias leaned
more towards agreeing with the statements. With the ease of
use questions, the responses almost uniformly ranged from
neutral to strongly agree. Even though we saw the use of
the features drop during the second and third week of the
study, the participants continued to report similar responses
regarding the usefulness and ease of use of the system.

Visual Inspection and Scrolling Operations

The abstract overview feature provided searchers with the
ability to visually inspect an abstract representation of the
search results set, and easily scroll or jump to a location
of interest. Table 5 shows the frequency of use of these
operations during the study.
Clearly, the features were being used heavily in the first
week, and then almost not at all in the remainder of the
study. This change in participant behaviour is similar to
what was seen in the other interactions: heavy use of the
features in the first week, followed by reduced use in the
second and third week. With respect to these scrolling operations, it is likely that the participants were trying them
out in the first week, and then continued to scroll in the
way they are accustomed (using the regular scroll bar or the
scroll-wheel on their mouse) for the remainder of the study.
It appears that the abstract visual representation used here
may not convey enough information to support identifying
individual documents to analyze further.

5.3.2

Changes Over Time

The variability of the responses to the questions regarding
the usefulness and ease of use were analyzed using a chisquared test for independence based on the week-to-week

123

D..="!"

D..="#"

D..="$"

D..="%"

worse 

'()*+",-./0,1234506")*"67"8.9"(.2:5-)*+"
.*29;.<"6.",0"255063;)(-",2(=("60:.">?)5=;74"

10 

'()*+",-./0,1234506")63:0@.<"67"8.9"
(.2:5-"3.:A0:62*5.4"

8 

'()*+",-./0,1234506")*"67"8.9"(.2:5-)*+"
)*5:.2(.<"67"3:0<?5B@),74"

6 

be5er 

4 

'()*+",-./0,1234506".*-2*5.<"67"
.C.5B@.*.(("D-.*"(.2:5-)*+",-."8.94"

2 

'()*+",-./0,1234506"62<."),".2().:",0"
(.2:5-",-."8.94"

0 

E"A0?*<",-./0,1234506"?(.A?;"A0:"(.2:5-)*+"
,-."8.94"

week 2 change 
strongly
!"

disagree

disagree
#"

neutral
$"

agree
%"

7((C"$"

week 4 change 

Figure 4. Participants with statistically significant changes in their responses to the usefulness measures.

worse 
7((C"#"

week 3 change 

strongly&"
agree

Figure 2. Average responses to the questions
regarding the usefulness of the system over the
four-week study period.

7((C"!"

no change 

no change 

be5er 

10 

7((C"%"

8 

'()*+,+-"./"/0(*).(".1(2/.3)045/6"7)8"()89"
:/*"6(4"

6 

;":/<+=",."()89"./"-(.".1(2/.3)045/6"./"=/"
71).";"7)+.(=",."./"=/4"

4 

39",+.(*)5>/+"7,.1".1(2/.3)045/6"7)8"5?()*"
)+="<+=(*8.)+=)@?(4"

2 

;":/<+=".1(2/.3)045/6"./"@("A(B,@?("./"
,+.(*)5."7,.14"

0 

;."7)8"()89":/*"6("./"@(5/6("8C,??:<?")."<8,+-"
.1(2/.3)045/64"

week 2 change 

week 3 change 

week 4 change 

;":/<+=".1(2/.3)045/6"()89"./"<8(4"
strongly
!"
disagree

disagree
#"

neutral
$"

agree
%"

Figure 5. Participants with statistically significant changes in their responses to the ease
of use measures.

strongly&"
agree

Figure 3. Average responses to the questions
regarding the ease of use of the system over
the four-week study period.

5.3.3

Open-Ended Feedback

Participants were encouraged to provide general comments
about the system after completing each of the online questionnaires as well as the post-study questionnaire. This
open-ended feedback was analyzed using thematic content
analysis. Although there were a number of positive comments and recommendations for new features, we focus
here on the problems and difficulties participants reported.
The most frequent negative comment was with respect
to the underlying search engine. The system used search
results provided by Yahoo. However, all the participants reported using Google as their primary search engine. This
lead to impressions of poor performance with respect to obtaining a good set of search results. In future studies, we
must ensure that the underlying search engine matches the
user’s preference in order to avoid this negative impression.
A small portion of the participants reported slow load

responses of the 11 participants who completed the study.
For all the scores that experienced a statistically significant
change from one week to the next (χ2 < 0.95) we determined whether the change was positive or negative. The
results of this analysis are provided in Figures 4 and 5.
For both the usefulness and ease of use measures, as
time progresses, the responses stabilized resulting in fewer
changes in impressions. It should be noted that for the usefulness measure, there were two participants who varied
their responses between questionnaire submissions from being less useful, to more useful, to less useful. One of these
participants also varied their responses to the ease of use
questions in a similar manner.

124

times with the system. Certainly, there is some overhead in
calculating and rendering the features of the system, when
compared to the simple representations used by the top
search engines. During the development process, we found
the performance of the system to be acceptable using modern computer systems and browsers. It is possible that some
participants were using older equipment and slower Internet
connections. As network speeds increase and computers become faster, such problems will be reduced.
There were also a number of minor issues that were identified by the participants. These included problems with
the removal of stop-words from the query term headers, the
perception of clutter in the display, and the inability of the
system to recommend better query terms for the user. The
next version of theHotM ap.com will address these issues.
5.3.4

with results that have been reported on Web search user behaviour [20].
In the cases where the search results were re-sorted, this
feature proved to be quite successful. Of the documents
that were deemed to be relevant (i.e., clicked by the user),
most were promoted to a more prominent location in the
search results list than they would have occupied given
the original order provided by the underlying search engine. As such, we conclude that the re-sorting features of
theHotM ap.com are valuable and useful.
With respect to the query refinement features, a large
portion of the queries were manually refined, with only a
small number taking advantage of the interactive query refinement features. We conclude that the term histogram was
valuable for guiding the user in refining their query. However, the visual indicator that supported the one-click addition or removal of query terms may have been too subtle.
Similarly, the ability to navigate within the abstract
overview of the search results set may not have had sufficient visual cues to indicate its function. However, some
participants did note that they found this overview useful for
quickly determining the makeup of the search results set.
Over the course of the four-week study, there was some
variance in the responses to the questions regarding the utility and ease of use of the system. As time went on, this
variance was reduced as the participants learned how to use
the system and increase the effectiveness of their searches.
Most of the responses regarding usefulness were in the neutral to agree range; whereas most of the responses regarding the ease of use were in the agree to strongly agree range.
As such, we conclude that the system can be useful (e.g., for
searches that are exploratory), and that the system is easy to
use.

Continuation of Use

Part of the post-study questionnaire included a question regarding the use of theHotM ap.com after the conclusion
of the required use period. Of the participants who saw
the study through to its completion, 73% indicated that they
continued to use the system. However, none of them indicated using it as their primary search engine due to the fact
that the underlying search engine was different from their
preferred search engine. This willingness to continue to use
the system after the completion of the study is a strong indication of the benefits it provided to the participants.

5.4

Discussions

This real-world user evaluation provides a much richer
view of how theHotM ap.com is being used than the previous laboratory studies conducted on the individual components. In this study, participants were able to conduct
searches on whatever topic they wished, and used the system as part of their regular work, school, and home activities
for an extended period of time. Unfortunately, it is difficult
to untangle the benefits of the visual representations of the
data from the interactions with those elements. Therefore,
we base our conclusions on how the features of the system
were used, under the assumption that the utility of a feature
is an indication of the effectiveness of its visual representation.
While the re-sorting features of the system were not used
heavily, this may not be as negative of a result as it appears.
These features were designed to support exploratory search
activities. It may be that many of the searches conducted
by the participants were targeted searches, for which the
underlying search engine performed well. In these cases,
there would have been little need to explore the search results. Although the proportion of queries that were explored
in an interactive manner appears to be low (7%), it is inline

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we outline and report on a real-world user
evaluation of theHotM ap.com. We found that while the
search results exploration features were not used heavily,
they were effective when the searchers chose to use them.
The query refinement features did support the construction
of new queries, although the automatic methods for doing
so were underutilized. In the end, most participants agreed
that the system was useful and easy to use.
Future work includes replicating these studies using
search results provided by Google (since all the participants
in this study used Google as their primary search engine),
making refinements to the system based on the outcomes
of this study, and exploring other visual representations that
may support the user-centric activities of interactive search
results exploration and interactive query refinement. We
also wish to explore other search domains that may benefit from such visual and interactive search interfaces, such

125

as library systems and corporate intranets.

[14] O. Hoeber and X. D. Yang. Evaluating WordBars in exploratory Web search scenarios. Information Processing and
Management, 44(2):485–510, 2008.
[15] O. Hoeber and X. D. Yang. HotMap: Supporting visual explorations of Web search results. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(1):90–
110, 2009.
[16] B. J. Jansen, A. Spink, and T. Saracevic. Real life, real users,
and real needs: A study and analysis of user queries on the
web. Information Processing and Management, 36(2):207–
227, 2000.
[17] H. Joho, C. Coverson, M. Sanderson, and M. Beaulieu. Hierarchical presentation of expansion terms. In Proceedings
of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pages 645 –
649, 2002.
[18] B. Kules, J. Kustanowitz, and B. Shneiderman. Categorizing Web search results into meaningful and stable categories using fast-feature techniques. In Proceedings of the
ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 2006.
[19] Mozilla. Firefox Web browser. http://www.mozilla.
com/en-US/firefox/, 2008.
[20] R. W. White and S. M. Drucker. Investigating behavioral
variability in web search. In Proceedings of the International World Wide Web Conference, pages 21–30, 2007.
[21] Yahoo.
Yahoo search Web searvices.
http://
developer.yahoo.com/search, 2008.
[22] Yahoo. Yahoo Web search. http://www.yahoo.com/,
2008.

Acknowledgements
This research has been made possible through the first
author’s Discovery Grant, provided by the Natural Science
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
The development of theHotM ap.com was funded by the
University-Industry Liaison Office at the University of
Regina.

References
[1] Ask. Ask.com search engine. http://www.ask.com/,
2008.
[2] E. Berenci, C. Carpineto, V. Giannini, and S. Mizzaro. Effectiveness of keyword-based display and selection of retrieval results for interactive searches. International Journal
on Digital Libraries, 3(3):249–260, 2000.
[3] P. Borlund. The IIR evaluation model: A framework for
evaluation of interactive information retrieval systems. Information Research, 8(3), 2003.
[4] Clusty. Clusty: the clustering search engine. http://
www.clusty.com/, 2008.
[5] F. D. Davis. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and
user acceptance of information technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3):319–340, 1989.
[6] M. D¨ork, S. Carpendale, C. Collins, and C. Williamson. VisGets: Coordinated visualizations of Web-based information
exploration and discovery. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1205–1212, 2008.
[7] Grokker. Grokker - enterprise search management and content integration. http://www.grokker.com/, 2008.
[8] M. Hearst. Tilebars: Visualization of term distribution information in full text information access. In Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 59–66, 1995.
[9] T. Heimonen and N. Jhaveri. Visualizing query occurrence
in search result lists. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Information Visualization, pages 877–882,
2005.
[10] O. Hoeber. User evaluation methods for visual Web search
interfaces. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Information Visualization, 2009.
[11] O. Hoeber, M. Brooks, D. Schroeder, and X. D. Yang.
TheHotMap.com: Enabling flexible interaction in nextgeneration Web search interfaces. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence, pages 730–734, 2008.
[12] O. Hoeber and X. D. Yang. Interactive Web information retrieval using WordBars. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence, pages 875–882, 2006.
[13] O. Hoeber and X. D. Yang. The visual exploration of Web
search results using HotMap. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Visualization, pages 157–
165, 2006.

126

