2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Geolocating and Georeferencing: GIS Tools for Ancient Maps Visualisation
P. Chias, T. Abad
Dept. of Architecture, Technical School of Architecture and Geodesy, University of Alcalá, Spain
{pilar.chias@uah.es, tabad@ciccp.es}
benefits that users can draw from the
information [2].
• The preservation and storage of this digital
collections to ensure that future generations can
access the digital material, and to prevent losses
of contents.
Maps represent an important part of the richness of
Europe’s history and its cultural and linguistic diversity,
and can be increasingly accessed through local libraries
websites based on open-access models settled on the
principles of free, worldwide access to the information,
following the trend of voluntary sharing.
The online presence of this cartographic material
will make it easier for citizens to appreciate their own
culture heritage as well as the heritage of other European
countries, and to use it for study, work or leisure. It will
be a rich source of raw material to be re-used in different
sectors and for different purposes and technological
developments.
As a first stage of the Project we have built a
relational multilingual database of the Ancient Spanish
Maps that could be accessed through Internet [3]. As a
second stage we have implemented an open GIS based
on this e-Library that includes all the capabilities due to
the GIS tools and the geocoding.
The GIS based e-Library on Ancient Spanish
Cartography has then considerably enlarged its usability.
It also proposes a new paradigm in digital libraries [4].

Abstract
The e-Library on Ancient Spanish Cartography has
been created inside the frame set by the European Union
about the Europe’s digital cultural heritage to give a
response to the real demand among citizens and within
the research community. With this aim we have applied
the most advanced information and communication
technologies (ICTs) to make ancient Spanish maps and
views accessible through Internet. On a first stage we
have built a relational multiformat and multilingual
database that included high resolution images of the
cartographic documents and that supported the online
accessibility structured by levels. This platform has been
recently improved by implementing an open GIS based
on the data sets of the e-Library. GIS tools have enlarged
the usability of the system as the traditional geolocation
searches are now completed with the queries based on
maps’ georeferencing. The GIS on Ancient Spanish Maps
suggests a new concept in digital map libraries.
Keywords- GIS, Cartographic Heritage, Digital
Libraries, Online accessibility, Multilingual and
Multiformat Databases

1. Introduction
According to the strategies of the Council of the
European Union about the European Digital Libraries [1]
considered as a common multilingual access point to
Europe’s digital cultural heritage. Assuming that the
ancient maps and plans are important cultural materials,
in the last decade there have been created several
cartographic databases that allow an efficient online
accessibility.
This libraries are defined as organised collections of
digital contents made available to the public, and are
composed of analogue materials that have been digitised
as well as of born digital materials. They must also
follow several main strands as are:
• The online consultation, stressing the
importance of exchanging information and
publishing the results, in order to maximize the

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.96

2. A new concept of a map library
The e-Library of the Spanish ancient cartography
that we have built, introduces new approaches to the
documents within the traditional ones of the librarians
[5]. By supporting the points of view provided by an
interdisciplinary team of searchers, the old formats have
turned into new ones that bring together both scientific
and technical approaches to the history of cartography
with humanistic and historical methodologies. The eLibrary tries to gather together and synthesize disparate
fields through a clearly articulated focus on digital
technology in the context of Cultural Heritage.
Our project of a digital cartographic database
accessed through GIS is related to, but distinctive from
the history of cartography, and looks for the integration

535
529

of digital technologies with the cartographic heritage
providing new approaches to, and new audiences for the
history of cartography.
We have designed a methodology that applies all
those digital technologies to the history of cartography
and helps to establish new relationships, provides an easy
access to images to make analysis and comparisons,
shows the map distribution on the different archives, and
finally allows to reconstruct the historical landscapes and
the history of the territory through old maps. This is one
the main targets of our project, but the final one is to
spread the old cartographic treasures that compose a
relevant part of the Spanish cultural heritage, that
actually remains unknown to the public and even to a
great number of specialists [6] [7].
Briefly we can expose our main targets as follows:
• To spread and relate the contents of the various
Spanish archives to provide the study of the old
maps and plans giving a broad overall view, to
be applied to the deep study of the historical
evolution of the territory and the landscape at
different scales.
• To enlarge the available information about the
ancient cartographic documents, not only
through the metadata of each image, but also
with other contents that are located in particular
or non digitised collections.
• To enlarge the possibilities of the traditional
searches on the databases through the queries
that are useful through the GIS tools, that
include issues as metric and geometric
accuracy.
• To use the new technologies to study and
diffuse the cartographic heritage through
Internet.
• To explore new visualisation methods, tools and
algorithms, the multiple view techniques
(including multiform views and multiple
representations) as well as dynamic and rapid
interactive visualization techniques, and the use
of coordinated views, tight coupling or linked
views.
• To search for data transformation and reexpression for exploratory visualization.

• Visualisation and virtual environments.
In Spain, the interdisciplinary Working Group on
Cartographic Heritage (GTI PC-IDE) in the SDI (Spatial
Data Infrastructures), inside the Comisión Especializada
en Infraestructuras de Datos Espaciales (CE IDE) of the
Consejo Superior Geográfico, aims to promote the
publication of historical geographic documents through
the SDI.
This Working Group is composed by several
members of the IBERCARTO Working Group of
Spanish and Portuguese Map Libraries, whose first
meeting was recently hold in the Institut Cartogràfic de
Catalunya in Barcelona, June 25. 2008.
Among its main targets are:
• The publication of geographical and historical
data and documents & metadata and registers in
Internet, through the SDI strategy, searching the
interchange among the MARC format and the
metadata format ISO 19115.
• The optimisation of the Web services of
localisation,
visualisation,
downloading,
transformation and geoprocessing.
• The data and documents generation (with the
associated metadata).
• The client applications that allow the use of this
services.
• And the provision of a general framework.
Also in Spain the AVANZA plan for the
development of the Information Society has started a
first digitisation and online publishing programme for the
2006-2010 period, in accordance with the national
standards in an OAI-PHM protocol compatible system.
Although the main Spanish cultural offices are
making a strong effort to digitise the public collections of
historical documents, that at the beginning of 2006
included 109 collections of Spanish libraries, the
particular case of ancient maps carries up problems such
as those posed by the different locations, techniques,
sizes and preservation conditions, as well as the high
costs that are delaying the prompt achievement of their
diffusion. And we have to mention another problem
associated to the difficulties of finding those maps,
because they are frequently included into other
documents or inside bundles of old papers, and remain
yet undiscovered.
Among those important initiatives we will
emphasize the digital libraries created by the Institut
Cartogràfic de Catalunya [9], the Instituto Geográfico
Nacional and those of the Portal de Archivos Españoles
(PARES) that is participating in the MICHAEL project;
they not only show free low-resolution images of each
map, but provide an accurate description of the document
and the conditions of use.

2.1. The context
The First International Workshop on Digital
Approaches to Cartographic Heritage hold in
Thessaloniki, May 18-19. 2006 [8] has been the
inaugural meeting of the near-eponymous ICA Working
Group. Founded in La Coruña in July 2005, it
complements the Working Group on the History of
Colonial Cartography, as well as the five existing ICA
Commissions named:
• Maps and the Internet.
• Theoretical cartography.
• Education and training.
• Map projections.

2.2. The use of the new technologies
The digital technologies were formerly used by other
disciplines (archaeology and historical geography) and
had practical non-academic applications (town planning,
librarianship).

530
536

Finally, the spatial portal or geoportal is designed
with the aim of being a website access to the
cartographic documents not only for searchers, but also
to the whole society. It provides different functionalities
and search tools that are useful to manage the datasets
about the ancient cartography, to get spatial information
and to ease online approaches to the geo-knowledge.

Among the possibilities of the digital images, the
new computerized methods and digital technologies have
brought an explosion of the scope and potential of the
digital cartography, allowing and encouraging the
interaction with early maps with the aim of furthering
our understanding of their content in all its aspects. But
they also introduce new ways of connecting early maps
with other kinds of information, inviting us to use new
forms of presentation and making easy a speedier
transmission of images the world over. This is
particularly interesting for the creation of the European
Space of Information.
On the other hand, the digital cartography is not a
loss, but a useful tool in the traditional scholar research
[10]; but it must remain as a central theme of discussion
the ways in which the digital technologies may be of
particular value to historians of cartography, deepening
on subjects as:
• How digital technologies are already providing
access to early maps (and related materials)
through a range of methods, including:
improved reproduction, electronic facsimiles,
websites, new forms of presentation and
integration, and new forms of digital
preservation and archiving (for instance, by
using photogrammetric techniques in seaming
together images of large maps to create more
authentic facsimiles), dynamically integrating
maps with other information using the web,
applying new ways of visualising and
presenting early mapping, and associating new
metadata as structured summary information
about a cartographic source to encode data on
and about historical maps.
• The digital technologies that are allowing new
ways of understanding the content of early
maps, allowing the digital analysis of map
geometry and the use of digital transparency
techniques focused on the cartometric analysis
of early maps, the reassessment of the
projections used in 15th and 16th centuries
nautical charts, based on a study of navigational
practices, technologies and texts, or the use of
precise methods and mathematics behind the
transformations of old maps in various georeferencing projects.
• How digital technologies and particularly
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) are
allowing new ways of integrating early maps
with other information making the 3-D
visualisation more accessible, realistic and
impressive, or combining historical maps and
associated textual and numerical information to
get a spatial analysis of agricultural productivity
and its relationship with the landowners through
integrating cadastral and statistical information;
two examples can be quotated: the Gregoriano
Cadastre [11] and the old cadastral maps of
Utrecht [12], both focused on a deep knowledge
of the reconstruction of the old properties.

3. The cartographic databases
The design of a Digital Map Library (DML) must
consider some particularities about its specific contents
and the great variety of potential users.
The usability principle and the application of clear
search and browsing functionalities must help to spread
this essential part of the cultural heritage.

3.1. The classification
cartographic documents

of

the

ancient

To define the contents of our cartographic database
we have decided to apply the ICA’s Working Group
broad definition of cartographic heritage as “anything of
cultural value inherited from maps and accessible to a
broad public community”, as well as the wide sense
concept of a cartographic document of Harvey [13] and
Harley and Woodward [14] that includes all kinds of
maps, plans and charts at different scales (architectural,
urban and territorial scales), as well as pictures and
bird’s-eye views [15] [16], with no restrictions due to
techniques, functions or origins.
Ancient cartography, as well as old pictures,
drawings and photographs, has not been used
traditionally as a reliable source of information about the
history and the evolution of the land- and the townscape.
Those graphic materials have been usually considered as
‘second order’ documents, mainly because of the
difficulties that their interpretation can sometimes
involve [17] due to the different conventions that are
applied in each case by the cartographer. Nowadays the
“digital cartography and the history of cartography are
not yet comfortable bedfellows” [18].
But this is not the only reason why cartography is so
seldom used in the historical searches, because there are
other problems related to the difficulties of their
localisation and visualisation that have to be considered.
Obviously, it is not easy to access to an original big
size and small-scale map that is sometimes composed by
several printed sheets; and it is also complicated to see
properly the symbols employed in the map and read its
texts when it is imposed to handle a reduced hardcopy or
a low resolution digital image.
3.1.1. International standards about catalogues as
the ISO Norm 23950 and the Open Archive Initiative
(OAI), are well defined and use similar data collecting
procedures. As we are members of the above mentioned
interdisciplinary Working Group on Cartographic
Heritage (GTI PC-IDE) in the SDI (Spatial Data

531
537

Infrastructures), we are applying an interchange among
the MARC format and the metadata format ISO 19115.

•

‘Bibliography’, that includes the complete
bibliographical references that appear in the
field Bibliography of the table ‘Cartography’.
• ‘Libraries, Archives and Map Collections’, is
the table that includes the complete references
of the collections that have been visited, and
that appear just as an acronym in both
Collection and Signature fields of the table
‘Cartography’.
The three tables have been designed sharing at least
one field that allows crossing the data files and
economizes data length in the databases.

3.1.2. Catalogues and metadata. Although we find
it is not essential to have an exhaustive knowledge of the
context of each map to get a meaningful interpretation of
it [19] [20], it is necessary to achieve some basic specific
concepts on the theory of the cartographic expression
and design (about map projections, symbols or
representation of relief, for instance), because the lack of
them can difficult the right interpretation of the
document and twist the results of the investigations [21].
For this reason we provide for each document both the
archivist contents and the metadata

3.2.1. The table ‘Cartography’ joins both the
descriptive and the technical data about each document,
joining the perspectives of the historian and the
cartographer. The items that have been included are the
following:
• Place or Subject (text field): Refers to the
geographical place that is represented in the
document and the province it belonged to, since
the reform of 1831. To define clearly the
territorial limits, the old councils or boundaries
are also included. And to determine the original
uses of the map, it is also specified if it is a
general, thematic (geological, military, statistic,
cadastral, etc.) or a topographical map or plan.
• Date (numerical field): as precise as the
document can be dated. If it is only an
approximated date, it is quoted among square
brackets.
• Kind of Cartographic Document (text field): it
defines if it is a map or plan, a chart, a portolan
or a view, or even a terrestrial globe.
• Size (text): width and height of the image in
mm; it is also included the total size of the
sheet(s) (or other supporting materials) and the
number of pieces or sheets that compose the
ensemble of the document.
• Collection and Signature (text): the collection
that preserves the document and the signature;
the first one is quoted through an acronym and
the second one is abbreviated according to the
norms (its total extension can be consulted in
the table ‘Libraries, Archives and Museums’); if
possible, it includes the link to other e-libraries
or references.
• Original Title (text): quoted among inverted
commas if it is literal, as it is written in the
document; otherwise it is defined among square
brackets through its main features.
• Author(s) (text): names of the author(s) if the
map is signed; in case of ascription, the name(s)
appear among square brackets; they can be also
‘unknown’.
• Scale (text): it is defined graphically or as a
fraction, detailing the different units employed;
when there is no definition scale, appears
‘without scale’.

3.2. Contents and structure
As we must also restrict the temporal and the
geographical subject of the contents of the cartographic
databases, we firstly decided to include all the historic
documents that have been drawn before 1900, mainly
because along the 20th century the cartographic
production and techniques have very much increased in
many senses and its study should be carried separately.
Secondly, the spatial restriction has been imposed to the
search and we decided that the cartographic database
should concern the actual Spanish territories.
Assuming all those circumstances, the former stages
of our search are focused on finding, studying and
cataloguing all kind of cartographic documents that are
preserved in the main Spanish collections, archives and
libraries as the Biblioteca Nacional de España (Madrid),
Biblioteca del Palacio Real (Madrid), Biblioteca del
Monasterio de El Escorial (Madrid), Biblioteca de la
Universidad de Barcelona, Biblioteca de la Universidad
de Salamanca, Real Academia de la Historia (Madrid),
Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando
(Madrid), Archivo Histórico Nacional (Madrid), Archivo
General de Simancas (Valladolid), Archivo de la Real
Chancillería (Valladolid), Archivo del Centro Geográfico
del Ejército (Madrid), Instituto de Historia y Cultura
Militar (Madrid), Instituto Geográfico Nacional
(Madrid), Museo Naval (Madrid) and Archivo de Viso
del Marqués (Ciudad Real) among many others, as well
as in local and ecclesiastical archives.
The next step was to construct the relational
databases over a commercial compatible platform. They
have been designed as multilingual (there is already an
English and a Spanish version) and open ones to allow
including new registers in the future and even adding
new fields or tables, to update the contents to the new
needs without damaging the existing ones. Moreover the
concept ‘relational’ implies the possibility of crossing the
data of the different tables and reducing their weights,
making easier the data management and the queries.
According to this, our methodology includes three
main tables, that are the following:
• ‘Cartography’, that contents all the registers
concerning the cartographic documents and
follows the ISBD Norms of cataloguing.

532
538

•

•

•

•
•

•

•
•

•

Projection (text): details the projection
employed with its different elements: grid,
references, orientation; it is also referenced the
use of different projections, for instance profile
or section added, axonometric or perspective
views, with their own distinctive elements, and
even the case of large scale plans.
Technique (text): makes a distinction between
manuscripts and printed maps, as well as the
drawing surfaces and techniques, specifying the
uses of color.
Short History (of the map, text): place of
edition, editor, or if it is a part of a big
compilation or atlas. It is also mentioned where
it comes from or the precedent owners, and the
date of purchasing.
References (of the map, text): abbreviated and
following the international system for scientific
quotations ISO 690-1987.
Image (object/container field): it is included a
low resolution raster image in highly
compressed jpg format of the cartographic
document. By clicking on the image, it is
possible to display a high resolution one in a tiff
format that allows to see the details and to read
the texts. If the map is composed by several
sheets, it is possible to see each one separately
(and to compose it apart) (see below, The GIS
implementation).
Other Remarks (text): in the case of a printed
map, includes other collections that have a
copy, or variations of the plate, as well as
manuscript notes, etc.
Date (of the catalogue, aut.).
Operator (for future updates).

Collection (Extended Name) (text).

3.3. Digitisation and preservation
3.3.1. Digitisation. Sometimes digitisation has been
primarily used to preserve the existing original and
analogue materials (that can be degrading), but
digitisation and preservation are strongly interrelated and
therefore have to be considered together. Specially in
case of rare works (as several maps are), consultation of
the digital copy can replace the physical manipulation of
the original, which will add to its longevity.
The risk of losing digital material has been taken in
account in our digitisation programme, because
digitisation without a proper preservation strategy may
become a wasted investment.
Some technical specifications about digitisation that
have been used in the project are the following:
• The
name
of
the
image
files:
FFFXX_NNNNNNNN_T.EXT, where:
• FFF: Archive ID, max. length 5 characters;
provided by each archive.
• XX: Internal ID of the collection; length 2
characters.
• NNNNNNNN: File ID that includes a
geographical reference (province); variable
length from 1 to 20 characters, from A to Z
or from a to z, without accent, includes (-)
but not the rest of characters including (_),
that is used to separate the different ID
groups of the image.
• T: image format on screen: V = illustration,
T = 1/3 screen, P = full screen, 2 = high
definition (2.000 x 3.000 pixels), 4 = high
definition 4.000 x 6.000 pixels, H = high
definition (more than 4.000 x 6.000 pixels).
• EXT: extension of the format: JPG, GIF,
TIFF, PCD…
Example for an image of the Biblioteca Nacional de
España, BNEM_002348CR_V.jpg
• Image formats: open formats based upon norms
and standards whose specifications are public.
We have only considered both formats of
preservation and diffusion when images are
born digital material in the University of Alcalá,
and can be diffused in a high definition version
because there are no copyright problems. We
always indicate the file format, including the
version (for example, TIFF version 6).
• Image file metadata: is a dataset that informs
about other data in order to support their search,
management and preservation (Dublin Core
Norm). They can be descriptive (Subject,
Description, Author, etc.), technical (Format,
Digitisation options, etc.) and administrative
(Copyright, etc.). There are two possibilities of
relating the metadata and the image file that are
the external storage or the inclusion of the
metadata in the file. We have decided to

3.2.2. The table ‘References’ defines completely
the abbreviations and acronyms used in the other tables.
The quotations follow the ISO 690-1987 Norm. The
fields are in this case:
• Author(s) (text).
• Date (of edition, numerical).
• Title (of the book, text).
• Article’s Title (text).
• Periodical or Book (in case of articles or book
chapters, text or link).
• Publisher (text).
• Place (text).
• Volume (numerical).
• Pages (text).
• Quotation (text): as it appears in the other
tables.
3.2.3. The table ‘Libraries, Archives and Map
Collections’ makes possible to identify the acronyms
used in the Collection and Signature field. It contains the
following fields that complete the location of the
documents:
• Library (Abbreviation) (text).
533
539

combine them by maintaining the essential
metadata (as are the image ID, Title, Archive
and Date of digitisation) inside the digital file,
while the rest of the metadata are stored in other
external databases.
Storage supports and infrastructure: we have
chosen the optical devices because of their
capacity, durability, reliability, accessibility,
volume, stability, and cost, among other
qualities.

4.1. The cartographic base

4. The GIS implementation

The possibility of drawing our own vector
cartography inside the GIS not only avoids the problems
derived from the import of graphic files through the dxf
format, but allows an easy definition of the base maps,
that only need to make a clear definition of the graphic
features that must be digitised and of the strategies that
must be followed to compose the base maps.
We have decided not to use the existing digital
cartography that is available because it would suppose a
hard process to clean, verify and structure it
topologically. We found it would be harder to extract and
add the features that were interesting to our GIS in the
existing cartography, that to draw a new one specifically
designed for it.
The new cartographic base has been structured in
data layers and sheets at a 1:200.000 scale, and we have
selected the graphic formats, the georeference and the
symbolism according to:
• The guidelines of the Instituto Geográfico
Nacional of Spain, that ensures a proper
understanding of both topographic and
planimetric data as well as an easy connection
to other existing or future GIS.
• The use of visual attributes such as color,
texture, orientation and shape in information
visualisation (infovis) to convey the proper
information in maps [24].
• The attributes of shape through the study of its
component dimensions and the cognitive
underpinnings that support the suitable use of
shape for categoric, quantitative or other kind of
data [25].

The open vector GIS is supported by a commercial

4.2. The connection to the data bases

•

3.3.2. Preserving digital content. A digital copy of
a document does not necessarily guarantee its long-term
survival: all digital material has to be maintained in order
to keep it available for use.
The main causes for the loss of digital content are
the succession of generations of hardware that can render
files unreadable (although the solution is the
development of systems capable of accessing the disks
using emulation techniques), the rapid succession and
obsolescence of computer programmes and the limited
lifetime of digital storage devices. Unless data are
migrated to current programs or care is taken to preserve
the original source code, retrieval of information may
become very costly, if not impossible. This is specially
hard for the ‘closed’ data formats (those whose source
code is not publicly known), that we have avoided.
That is why we have decided to use simultaneously
two platforms (PC and Mac) and compatible software for
both, as well as open systems, always according to the
PREMIS (Preservation Metadata for Digital Materials)
Working Group Report (version 2.0).

platform (GeoGraphics©) that includes a complete and
easy to use computer-aided mapping module in a vector
format (MicroStation©) and that is a standard with the
maximal compatibility, although the connection with the
database (ACCESS©, FileMaker©) must be established
through an ODBC protocol.
We have tried some other possible GIS platforms
that:
• Integrated both the databases and the computeraided mapping (ArcInfo©).
• Or imported the cartography in and exchange
and export format such as the dxf (MapInfo©).
The fist one were the most complete of all, but the
databases were not so easy to manage and it was
sometimes difficult to make changes in their structures.
The second group of GIS platforms allows an easy and
flexible management of the databases, but the problems
appear as the cartographic base must be imported,
because the exchange formats always suppose a flaw of
the information and the integrity of the graphic elements
that leads to a hasty process of validation of the digital
vectorial cartography [22] [23].

Due to the election we made of the GIS platform, the
connection of both cartographic, graphic and attribute
data storages is made through an ODBC protocol.
Both ACCESS© and FileMaker© are easy to handle
and don’t require any to give a special training to the
operators, but the first one makes ‘heavier’ databases
than the second one, and this is a disadvantage when
managing big amounts of data, as we do. FileMaker
brings also another important advantage, because the
fields of the tables are not limited to 256 characters, and
this allows to introduce more information if required.
Each ancient map is referred to a point, a line or a
centroid, depending on the territory they represent.
Points are used generally in town plans or views; lines
are used fundamentally to identify roads, railways and
other lineal structures. Centroids are mainly used to
identify the maps that represent the different territories.
Obviously, a single centroid can be related to more
than a map, and the different possibilities are
simultaneously shown in a first screen; afterwards the
different documents can be chosen separately.
On the other hand, the contours of the different
documents are drawn and referred to their own centroids:

534
540

quoted and respect the conditions that have been
established for consulting the documents by the right
holders; and we must neither set other supplementary
caution that restrict the access to the different data sets,
nor establish different access levels.

then it is quite easy to see the way the maps and plan
overlap each other, what allows to perceive rapidly the
portions of land that are covered by different maps and
which are the historical periods when they have focused
the attention due to different targets.
As it is shown, we have implemented three main
kind of datasets: the cartographic base, the tables that
contain the features that we have considered as relevant
to define each ancient map, and the sets of images, that
are divided in high and low-resolution images of the
map.
The datasets of the ancient maps include already
more than 4.000 files, that are continuously being
updated and distributed in the servers by geographical
units.

5.1. The geoportal
Geoportals are websites that enable the access to
several resources related to geoinformation.
Attending to the map resources that must be
accessed, our spatial portal gathers the characteristics of
both catalogue and application portals [33], by
combining the variety and potentiality of catalogue
services and the efficient access of the application
portals.
The catalogue option creates and maintains indexes
or catalogues that allow to make searches based on some
metadata parameters. The application option provides
efficient access to the datasets according to the user
needs, and are structured in User Interfaces that can
guide them to the special services they need.

4.3. Searches and queries
Our methodology has increased the possibilities of
the usual queries that a GIS brings, just formulating them
to the different databases separately or even crossing
them; but to ensure the proper display of the
cartographical information we have designed a filling
card as one of the main printable output ways.
They allow to get the main standard information of
the maps and bring a direct access to the low resolution
image sets, to prevent problems on handling the different
tables if they become too ‘heavy’.
Only in the exceptional cases that the copyright
owner allows it, the high resolution images are available.
This system and structure has been the most useful and
fits with the strategies that we have previously planned to
get the most varied and personalized information of the
GIS.
Obviously, traditional outputs as thematic mapping,
statistics, lists or reports are also available [26] [27].

Conclusions
According to the initiative of the Council of the
European Union about the European Digital Libraries as
a common multilingual access point to Europe’s digital
cultural heritage, and considering the ancient maps and
plans as important cultural materials, we have developed
an innovative GIS based methodology in ancient
cartographic documents, whose essential values are:
• To create new cartographic relational,
multiformat and multilingual databases that
organise and unify the information that different
archives and libraries have elaborated about
their different funds, as well as to incorporate
the dispersed and unknown documents that
belong to non-digitised collections. This new
information follows the ISBD Norm, and joins
and completes the different approaches of the
librarian, the historian [34] and the more
technical of the cartographer.
• The new databases join both already
digitised materials and new information
that we have directly produced in a digital
format. These circumstances allowed us to
get some mechanisms that facilitate the
digitalisation of maps, to identify problems
and to monitor bottle-necks (as those that
appear handling big size maps).
• They allow also to preserve the original
materials, that are usually fragile.
• The open GIS surpasses the usual operability of
the traditional multiformat databases as it
enlarges through the queries the way to access
to the different kind of data. But we have also
disposed a new and personalised way to access
to high resolution digital images of the
documents by applying the hypermedia concept.

5. The online accessibility and diffusion
Nowadays the web-based digital resources are quite
frequent as a way to preserve and diffuse the
cartographic heritage as well as to access to the modern
cartography [28] [29].
Previous experiences as the one implemented on the
Greek region of Macedonia [30] or the GIS-Dufour [31]
have shown the potential of GIS and its accessibility
through the web.
Under current EU-law and international agreements,
material resulting from digitisation can only be made
available online if it is in the public domain (in a narrow
sense, refers to information resources which can be
freely accessed and used by all, for example because
copyrights have expired) or with the explicit consent of
the right holders. The transparency and clarification of
the copyright status of works is very relevant to us.
As a matter of fact, our digital library is in principle
focused on public domain material, and as digital
preservation implies copying and migration, it has
always been considered in the light of IPR legislation
[32]: the digitised funds of other libraries are precisely

535
541

to be shown, we offer a link to a high
resolution image 1:1 that makes possible to
see every detail and to read every name to
analyse it properly.
B/ The basic challenges that we have found for digital
preservation are:
• The financial challenges: the real costs of
long-term digital preservation are not clear
yet and depend on storage costs, the
number of migrations needed over time,
including the efforts necessary to check the
integrity of the digital object after
migration. Once again choices have to be
made as to which material should be
preserved (according to the archival or
historical value, use, etc.).
• Organisational challenges: an added value
can be found in ensuring complementarities
and an exchange of good practices.
C/ Technical challenges:
• How to preserve the content so that it can
be accessed, trusted and reused in the
future, and how to preserve high volumes
of rapidly changing distributed information,
and how to develop tools, methods and
technologies to preserve dynamic content
(that changes as a result of user interactions
or adding new data), tools for automatic
analysis and indexing, and optimisation of
GIS tools.
• To improve its cost-efficiency and
affordability.
D/ Legal challenges: the traditional model of library
services is not easily transferred to the digital
environment, and as digital preservation depends on
copying and migration we have introduced a set of new
issues as:
• The
introduction
of
technological
protection measures to prevent copying.
• We are already studying the possibility of
setting a digital rights management system
restricting the access to digital material,
with the aim to ensure that IPR mechanisms
maintain a balance between enabling access
and use while respecting the rights of the
creators.
As a final conclusion, we can state that the pilot
experience about the Spanish ancient cartography
accessible through an open GIS and diffused through
Internet that we present is a successful example of the
full application of the methodology in all its stages.

•

Our methodology provides an easy and
successful electronic integration of
metadata and text, graphics and numerical
information about early maps.
• On-line accessibility and diffusion through the
Internet, as a response to a real demand among
citizens and within the research community,
always paying attention to the full respect to the
international legislation in the field of
intellectual property.
• This new methodology has been created aiming
to be an open one that allows being
implemented in all countries of the European
Union.
The essential challenges that we have undertaken during
the development of the project were:
A/ Those that have impacted the pace and efficiency of
digitisation:
• The
financial
challenges:
because
digitisation is labour-intensive and costly,
and as it is impossible to digitise all
relevant material, choices have to be made
on what is to be digitised and when.
• Organisational challenges: a ‘digitise once,
distribute widely’ strategy benefits all the
organisations involved in digitisation
projects; in this sense, ours not only shows
the duplicate maps in the different
collections, but allows to find the various
stages of the plates, following the history of
the different prints and editions of a map or
the collections, and their origins.
• Technical challenges: we have tried to
improve digitisation techniques in order to
make digitisation cost-efficient and
affordable. To digitise the non-digitised
funds we apply both the contact scanning
and the non-contact photographic methods
[35], trying to minimize the distortion
problems by digitising each sheet
separately, although this process can not
eliminate other problems in the final
assemblage of the mosaic image.
• Legal challenges: digitisation presupposes
making a copy, which can be problematic
in view of intellectual property rights (IPR).
We have considered the Directive
2001/29/EC on the harmonisation of certain
aspects of copyright and related rights in
the
information
society
(European
Parliament and Council directive of 22 May
2001, OJ L 167, 22.6.2001, p. 10), that
foresees an exception for specific acts of
reproduction by publicly accessible
libraries,
educational
establishments,
museums or archives. The maps that are yet
unpublished or remain unknown (for
instance, those of the private collectors) if
there is any legal obstacle that allows them

Acknowledgements
This paper is a result of two main searches:
• The Project EH-2007-001-00 “Las vías de
comunicación en la cartografía histórica de la
Cuenca del Duero: Construcción del territorio y
paisaje” that has been financed by the Centro de
Estudios Históricos de Obras Públicas y
536
542

Urbanismo
(CEHOPU-CEDEX)
of
the
Ministerio de Fomento (Spain).
• The Project PAI08-0216-9574 “La cartografía
histórica de la Comunidad de Castilla-La
Mancha en los principales archivos españoles”,
financed by the Consejería de Educación y
Ciencia de la Junta de Comunidades de CastillaLa Mancha.
Both are inscribed into our searchers’ guidelines on
the investigation of the cultural heritage through the
application of the most innovative technologies, as GIS
and multiformat databases, that set up an essential basis
for the knowledge of the history of the territory, the
landscape and the town. Since a decade our team is
engaged on setting up different useful methodologies that
are being implemented in the Technical School of
Architecture and Geodesy of the University of Alcalá.

[14] J.B. Harley and D. Woodward. ‘Preface’, in The History
of Cartography: Cartography in Prehistoric, Ancient,
and Medieval Europe and the Mediterranean, eds. J.B.
Harley and D. Woodward, The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, Illinois, vol. I, xv-xxi, 1987.
[15] R.L. Kagan (ed.). Ciudades del Siglo de Oro. Las vistas
españolas de Anton Van den Wyngaerde. Ediciones El
Viso. Madrid, 18, 1986.
[16] C. De Seta. L’iconografia urbana in Europa dal XV al
XIX secolo. In Cittá d’Europa. Iconografia e vedutismo
dal XV al XIX secolo. Napoli, Electa, 11-48, 1996.
[17] J.B. Harley. The evaluation of early maps: Towards a
methodology. Imago Mundi, no. 22, 68-70, 1968.
[18] F. Vázquez Maure and J. Martín López . Lectura de
mapas, Instituto Geográfico Nacional, Madrid, 1, 1989.
[19] R.A. Skelton. Looking at an early map, University of
Kansas Library, Lawrence, Kansas, 28, 1965.
[20] J.H. Andrews. Meaning, knowledge and power in the
philosophy of maps. In JB Harley, The new nature of
maps. Essays in the history of cartography, The Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, 21-58,
2005.
[21] P. Chías and T. Abad. Las vías de comunicación en la
cartografía histórica de la cuenca del Duero:
construcción del territorio y paisaje. Ingeniería Civil, no.
149, 2008, 79-91.
[22] P. Chías. Bases de datos y gestores de bases de datos
para los sistemas de información geográfica,
Publicaciones de la Escuela Técnica Superior de
Arquitectura, Universidad Politécnica, Madrid, 2004.
[23] P. Chías. La imagen de los fenómenos geográficos en un
sistema de información geográfica, Publicaciones de la
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura, Universidad
Politécnica, Madrid, 2004.
[24] E.R. Tufte. Visual Explanations. Images and Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative, Graphics Press, Cheshire,
Connecticut, 2007.
[25] R. Brath, M. Peters and R. Senior. Visualization for
Communication: The Importance of Aesthetic Sizzle.
DAViz – II, IEE, London, 2005, 724-742.
[26] R. Spence. Information Visualization. Design for
Interaction, Pearson, London, 2007
[27] E.R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press. 1990.
[28] Zentai Preservation of modern cartographic products. ePerimetron, vol. 4, no. 1, 2006, 308-313, viewed 2 July
2008,
<http://www.eperimetron.org/Vol_1_4/Vol1_4.htm>.
[29] E. Livieratos. The challenges of Cartographic Heritage in
the Digital World. In Third International Workshop
‘Digital Approaches to Cartographic Heritage,
Barcelona,
2008;
viewed
10
July
2008,
<http://web.auth.gr/xeee/ICAHeritage/Commission/3rd_Workshop/Livieratos_Heritag
e_Barcelona.pdf >.
[30] M. Jessop. Promoting cartographic heritage via digital
resources on the Web. e-Perimetron, vol. 3, no. 1, 2006,
246-252, viewed 2 July 2008, < http://www.eperimetron.org/Vol_1_3/Vol1_3.htm>.
[31] H.R. Egil and P. Flury. GIS-Dufour: historical maps as
base in a geographical information system. In Paper and
poster abstracts of the 22nd International Conference on
the History of Cartography, ed M Oehrli, Verlag
Cartographica Helvetica, Murten, 2007, 196.
[32] See [1].

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

Commission of the European Communities, 2005. i2010:
Digital Libraries. Brussels.
Council Conclusions on the Digitisation and Online
Accessibility of Cultural Material, and Digital
Preservation, 2006/C 297/01.
P. Chias and T. Abad. Visualising Ancient Maps as
Cultural Heritage: A Relational Databese of the Spanish
Ancient Cartography. In Information Visualization 2008.
IVS, IEEE, London, 453-457. July 2008.
R. Solar and D. Radovan. The change of paradigms in
digital map libraries. e-Perimetron vol. 3, no. 2, 2008,
53-62.
M.F. Goodchild. Cartographic perspectives on a digital
future. Cartographic Perspectives 36, 2000, 1-19.
C. Fleet. Digital Approaches to Cartographic Heritage:
The Thessaloniki Workshop. Imago Mundi, vol. 59, no.
I, 100-104, 2007.
P. Chias and T. Abad. A GIS in Cultural Heritage based
upon
multiformat
databases
and
hypermedia
personalized queries’, ISPRS Archives, no. XXXVI-5,
2006, 222-226.
E. Livieratos (ed.). Digital Approaches to Cartographic
Heritage, National Centre for Maps and Cartographic
Heritage, Thessaloniki, 2006.
R. Roset and N. Ramos. Present and future of tha Map
Library of Catalonia. e-Perimetron vol. 3, no. 4, 2008,
204-224.
C. Fleet. Digital Approaches to Cartographic Heritage:
The Thessaloniki Workshop. Imago Mundi, vol. 59, no.
I, 2007, 100-104.
M. Orciani, V. Frazzica, L. Colosi and F. Galletti.
Gregoriano cadastre: transformation of old maps into
Geographical Information System and their contribution
in terms of acquisition, processing and communication of
historical data. e-Perimetron, vol. 2, no. 2, 2007, 92-104,
viewed
2
July
2008,
<http://www.eperimetron.org/Vol_2_2/Vol2_2.htm>.
E. Heere. The use of GIS with property maps’, ePerimetron, vol. 4, no. 1, 2006, 297-307, viewed 2 July
2008,
<http://www.eperimetron.org/Vol_1_4/Vol1_4.htm>.
P.D.A. Harvey. Topographical maps. Symbols, pictures
and surveys, Thames and Hudson, London, 7, 1980.

537
543

[33] W. Tang and J.R. Selwood. Spatial portals: gateways to
geographic information. ESRI Press, Redlands, Ca, 2005.
[34] M.H. Edney. Maps and “other awkward materials”:
critical reflections on nature and purpose of
cartobibliography. In Paper and poster abstracts of the
22nd International Conference on the History of
Cartography, ed M Oehrli, Verlag Cartographica
Helvetica, Murten, 2007, 119.

[35] V. Tsioukas, M.Daniil and E. Livieratos. Possibilities
and problems in close range non-contact 1:1 digitization
of antique maps. e-Perimetron, vol. 3, no. 1, 2006, 230238,
viewed
2
July
2008,
<http://www.eperimetron.org/Vol_1_3/Vol1_3.htm>.

Figure 1 A detail of the cartographic base of the GIS, showing the different areas covered by some
th
th
ancient maps. In light grey: 17 century maps; in dark grey, 18 century maps. As a background is
th
reproduced a composed map of the same areas dating from the second half of the 19 century. It is
taken from the First Series Mapa Topográfico Nacional 1:50.000, from the sets in the Instituto
Geográfico Nacional, Madrid. Reference grid, 1º latitude and 1º longitud

538
544

