2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Topic-based Coordination for Visual Analysis of Evolving Document Collections
Danilo Medeiros Eler

Fernando Vieira Paulovich
Maria Cristina Ferreira de Oliveira
Rosane Minghim
Instituto de Ciˆencias Matem´aticas e de Computac¸a˜ o, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo
Av. Trabalhador S˜ao-carlense, 400 S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
{eler,paulovic,cristina,rminghim}@icmc.usp.br
Abstract

a text document collection. Named Topic-Time Coordination, it operates on multiple visual maps, each one reflecting a different time span. The basis for the coordination
are the topics addressed both by a set of target documents
and their neighboring (i.e., similar) documents in the different maps. Topics – represented by a set of representative terms occurring in the documents – are extracted with
a novel approach for automatic topic detection from texts.
These techniques are implemented in the Projection Explorer (PEx)visualization platform 1 [14].
The following section presents related work focused on
both analyzing the evolution of knowledge domains and exploring document collections based on extracted topics. In
Section 3 we describe our topic extraction algorithm and the
proposed coordination approach. Section 4 exemplifies how
this strategy can assist users in exploring document collections. Conclusions and further work are addressed in Section 5.

Document interpretation is a crucial task in many visual analytics applications, made harder by the widespread
availability of freely available textual files. In this paper we
propose an approach based on topic detection coupled with
multiple coordinated views to assist analysis of time varying document collections. Given multiple document maps
built from a set of text files, we define a strategy to support
users locating the evolution of topics addressed by the documents, along various time steps. The approach is supported
by a new algorithm for topic extraction from texts, also introduced. Finally, we show several examples illustrating
how the proposed strategy may be applied in the analysis of
document collections.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Domain Visualization (KDViz) approaches
must support the identification of complex patterns from
multiple, and usually large, textual data sources. It is common for such approaches to offer multiple visualizations, simultaneously displayed in different views and coordinated
– meaning that users may meaningfully interact with multiple data representations while exploring complex collections [9]. Recent KDViz approaches also incorporate specific mechanisms to assist analysts in investigating the evolution of a domain knowledge over time.
Many KDViz techniques generate visual maps based on
document content. For example, similarity-based maps attempt to visually convey (dis)similarity relationships observed among the documents. In a previous work [7] we
introduced a coordination model and, based on this model,
several coordination strategies for similarity-based document maps – i.e., maps where spatial proximity reflects document content similarity.
In this paper we introduce a new coordination mechanism to support investigation of the temporal evolution of
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.31

2

Related Work

One of the goals of KDViz is helping users to mentally
organize a great amount of digital information on a particular domain. To aid exploration, several systems incorporate strategies to identify relevant topics in the collection.
Topic extraction is performed either directly from the texts
[18, 11], or from predefined ontologies [10, 19].
Seeling and Becks [16] developed a system for exploring both structured and unstructured data that relies on coordinated views. A view that shows a pre-defined ontology
supports topic exploration over a document map. Selecting
a topic on the ontology view highlights related objects in
other views.
The Projection Explorer (PEx) [14] is a general visualization system that incorporates several point placement
techniques to generate similarity-based document maps.
1 PEx is available, including source code, at http://infoserver.
lcad.icmc.usp.br

149

Creating such maps typically requires a vector representation of the collection. Several multidimensional projection
techniques may be applied over the vector representation to
map the vectors into a lower dimensional space (e.g., two or
three dimensions), while retaining information about document similarity in their original vector space. A discussion
on the process of generating such maps may be found in
the above referenced paper. The important point to be made
here is that documents with similar content are expected to
be projected closer together than those with different content.
Once a 2D layout of the documents is available, the collection may be displayed as a point cloud, or as a graph with
edges mapping some kind of relationship. For example,
two points may be connected if they are k-nearest neighbors in the original space, for an arbitrary value of k, or if
they are k-nearest neighbors in the 2D projected space, or
yet the graph may depict a Delaunay triangulation of the
points. PEx offers several resources for users to interact
with these representations, including multiple coordination
functionalities. It also incorporates two distinct approaches
for automatic topic extraction from the corpus. One of them
employs a customized association rule mining algorithm to
detect relevant term associations [11]. The other approach,
introduced here, relies on an analysis of term covariance and
is very effective in summarizing the major topics addressed
by a group of documents.
Several other document visualization systems include
some type of topic detection, e.g., VxInsight [1], 3D Explorer [15], Concept Density Maps [6] and IN-SPIRE 2 . The
ThemeView visualization [20] in IN-SPIRE presents a text
collection as a landscape view. Hills are formed by adding
a weighted contribution from document terms within a region, and hill tops are labeled based on those terms that
contribute the most to their height. A similar strategy to determine theme strength is adopted in the ThemeRiver visualization, which shows thematic changes over time for a collection of time tagged documents [8]. Each theme is shown
as a colored river whose width varies to reflect its strength
along time.
Another approach for topic extraction from textual documents is by Chen [2]. He employs Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) to extract the most frequent terms from the
top ten documents related to the first three principal components. The most frequent words are deemed topics and used
as captions. Documents are colored and labeled according
to their relation to these principal components. Skupin [17]
also computes and ranks term frequencies to label regions
in document maps that resemble cartographical maps.
Techniques have also been recently introduced to identify temporal patterns that reflect the evolution of a knowledge domain [3]. Chen, for example, proposes the Progres2 See

sive Knowledge Domain Visualization (Progressive KDViz)
[3, 5], a method to simplify the identification of turning
points in scientific literature, incorporated in the CiteSpace
system [4]. Co-citation networks are one way of representing domain knowledge in CiteSpace. The whole data base is
split into time zones based on a given specific time or time
interval. Each time zone is associated to a co-citation network, which is visually linked to co-citation networks from
neighboring time zones. Users may explore a visualization
that integrates these networks. Another CiteSpace visualization shows the co-citation networks ordered by time and
also the bursty words identified in the collection [5].
Mane and Borner [12] generate co-word association
maps from the main topics in a collection. These maps are
created based on frequency analysis and identification of the
bursty words over time. This technique can identify strong
associations between words that co-occur in the same document.
Storylines is an exploratory visualization system [21]
that represents unstructured text as latent semantic networks. It provides several coordinated views, allowing different network configurations. Through word search and
mouse interaction, users may select some documents and
analyze their relationships with others. Documents are then
organized in a time-ordered tree to generate stories. Document nodes display information relative to the textual content, e.g., date, id, persons. The semantic networks enable
analysis of document information and relationships, and the
generation of clusters on which topic detection occurs.
In the following we describe how topic-based coordination of multiple map views may enhance user exploration
of a document collection and convey information about its
evolution over time.

3

Topic Time Coordination

The definition of ‘topic’ varies, but it typically refers to
an expression consisting of one or multiple words (terms)
that convey a representative summary of the major subjects or themes addressed by documents. In displaying a
large document collection, topic identification is essential
for users to focus on areas of interest and learn which concepts they should look for in a particular group of textual
inputs. Additionally, it plays a major role in many knowledge domain visualization tasks that require analyzing how
a document collection evolves over time.
A time dependent visualization driven by the topics addressed by documents is bound to support understanding of
how themes evolve, in applications varying from analysis of
research fields to investigation of written communication.
With this motivation in mind we propose an algorithm for
topic detection that summarizes textual content in a meaningful way. The output of topic detection is then employed

http://in-spire.pnl.gov/

150

equal to or above a defined threshold α, that is, if
covm (ti , tj , ts )/cov(ti , tj ) ≥ α, then term ts is included
in the topic. Therefore, only the terms with high linear dependency are topic descriptors. This is an improvement
over taking high frequent terms as topic representatives,
since frequency alone does not reveal relationships amongst
terms.
The final result of this process is a list of terms that
present strong linear relation. Two different factors contribute to the size of such list: (1) the number of documents
in the selection; and (2) the value of α. If documents are
highly similar in content, as expected for selections covering small neighborhoods on the map, some terms occur
more frequently, and thus one has more terms varying together. The size of the list of terms decreases as α increases,
but terms are, nonetheless, more linearly related. We defined empirically α = 0.5, though this value may be tuned
to meet user needs.
Due to the very nature of the process, topic description
is strongly influenced by the two initial terms, since they
define the remaining topic terms. Thus, other possibly important topic descriptorsmay be missed. In order to overcome this problem, whenever the ratio of the covariance of
any pair of terms and the largest covariance in the matrix is
above a certain threshold β, these terms are considered as a
new topic, and the topic induction is repeated for the pair.
The value of β may be set according to the target application. Tests conducted on different data sets suggest that a
value of β = 0.75 usually outputs a reasonable and consistent number of topics. The complete topic extraction process is depicted in Algorithm 1.

to link the simultaneous presentation of multiple document
maps reflecting different time spans. We define a document
‘topic’ as a set of two or more terms that occur in the document and convey information about the major themes it
addresses. The same definition extends to an arbitrary set
of documents: the topics for set are those extracted from its
containing documents.

3.1

Topic Detection by Term Covariance

The topic extraction process operates on similarity-based
document maps, introduced in Section (2). In these maps, a
k-neighborhood is defined for each document, given a particular user-defined value of k. This neighborhood consists
of the most similar documents to the target, as evaluated either in the visual space or the data (document) space. The
process starts with the user selecting a target sub-set of documents in the map. A “documents x terms” matrix is built
for the selection, in which each line represents a document
and columns correspond to terms that occur in the documents. The values in the matrix cells identify the frequency
of a specific term in a particular document.
The problem of identifying topics is handled by applying a term covariance analysis on this “documents x terms”
matrix. The two terms with the highest covariance in the
matrix are initially chosen as an initial descriptive topic for
the selection. The covariance measures the degree to which
two terms vary together in the textual input, being defined
as

cov(ti , tj ) =

1
n−1

n

(tki − t¯i )(tkj − t¯j )

(1)

k=1

Algorithm 1 Topic extraction using covariance.

where n is the number of documents in the selection, t¯i is
the average frequency of the i-th term ti , and tki and tkj
are the frequencies of the i-th and j-th terms in the k-th
document.
Once the two terms with the highest covariance have
been found, the average covariance between them and the
remaining ones is computed, that is

in:

out:

- M: the n × m “documents x terms” matrix calculated for the
n selected documents with m terms.
- α : the threshold for adding a new term to a topic.
- β : the threshold for adding a new topic to the list of topics.
- L: the list of extracted topics.

1: timax , tjmax = max{cov(ti , tj )} ∀ti , tj ∈ M
2: covmax = cov(timax , tjmax )
3: repeat
4: ti , tj = max{cov(ti , tj )} ∀ti , tj ∈ M and (ti ∈
/ lb or tj ∈
/
lb , ∀lb ∈ L)
5: cov = cov(ti , tj )
6: if cov/covmax ≥ β then
7:
create a new topic T = ∅
8:
add the terms ti and tj to T .
9:
for all tk ∈ M e tk = ti e tk = tj do
10:
if covm (ti , tj , tk )/cov ≥ α then
11:
add the term tk to T .
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
add the topic T to the list of topics L.
15: end if
16: until cov/covmax > β

cov(ti , ts ) + cov(tj , ts )
(2)
2
where ti and tj are the terms with the largest covariance,
and ts is the term for which we want to calculate the average
covariance, given ti and tj .
In order to speed up the computation of covariances, we
use only the most frequent terms, rather than all terms in the
selection. One may choose how many terms to consider, but
tests indicate that taking the 200 most frequent is sufficient
to obtain the terms which render the largest covariances.
Now, if the ratio between the average covariance of
a term ts and the highest covariance value found is
covm (ti , tj , ts ) =

151

Although the ability to tune parameters α and β conveys
flexibility, they must be defined with care. Too small values
may result in topics consisting of unrelated terms, or in too
many (sub-)topics extracted that are not good descriptors of
the document contents. On the other hand, if their values are
set too high, important (sub)topics may be missed, hiding
relevant information. Since the algorithm is fast, one may
apply an iterative procedure to converge to adequate parameters. The quality of the topic extraction approach is highly
dependent on selections to actually include documents with
highly similar content.

3.2

Coordinating Time Varying Document Maps

Figure 1. Topic Time Coordination among
three time views.

Our coordination model for similarity-based document
maps operates on different time-span (TS) maps of a collection. Each TS view displays a document map relative
to a specific time period, in an cumulative fashion. For instance, in a collection of scientific papers published from
1990 to 2005, one may create three TS views including, respectively, documents published from 1990 to 1994; from
1990 to 1999; and from 1990 to 2005. Notice that a subsequent TS view always incorporates the documents from the
previous one.
The proposed Topic Time Coordination operates by extracting topics in different TS views, considering a set of
user selected documents in a source TS view, and its neighborhood in succeeding TS views. The initial user selection triggers topic extraction on the source TS view. The
Topic Time coordination tracks the selected documents and
their neighboring documents in the remaining coordinated
TS views, showing the corresponding topics of both the selection and the neighborhood.
Operation is illustrated in Figure 1. First, the user selected two close documents in the view shown in the top
left map in Figure 1. Selected documents are the red circles shown with full opacity, their corresponding topic has
been automatically extracted and is also shown. These documents are highlighted in the other TS views, again shown
with opacity 1.0. Their two nearest-neighbors (2-nn) are
also highlighted, but with lower opacity, e.g., 0.6 – as shown
on the bottom and top right maps in Figure 1, which depict
other distinct map views. The topics displayed describe the
documents in the user selection, and their neighboring documents in the other map views. The topics shown in the
top maps in Figure 1 were extracted with the covariance
approach, whereas those shown in the bottom map were obtained with a different algorithm, called LWR[11]. Either
algorithm may provide the input for coordination.
The Topic Time coordination suggests new topics related
to the selection, based on its neighborhoods defined in the
maps representing different time spans. Henceforth, it re-

veals the evolution of an original topic, based on how similar its generating documents are to others that appeared
later. This coordination must operate on good similaritybased document maps, in order to produce meaningful results, i.e., on maps capable of preserving, in the projected
space, the document neighborhoods defined in the original
data space.

4

Results

We now illustrate how the Topic Time coordination functionality supports the analysis of a corpus of scientific papers. Maps of papers from four visualization conferences,
namely the Coordinated & Multiple Views (CMV) conference (papers from 2003 to 2008), the Information Visualization Conference (IV) (papers from 1997 to 2007), the
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (IEEE InfoVis) (papers from 2000 to 2006) and the IEEE Conference
on Visualization (IEEE Vis) (papers from 1990 to 2007)
were generated. This corpus includes 2,408 papers.
Title and abstract only were taken as textual content
to generate the maps, which were created with the Least
Square Projection (LSP) [13] technique and the co-sine distance as a measure of document similarity. Topic extraction
on all map views was performed with the term co-variance
approach, and document neighborhood is determined by the
meaning of the edges in the map graph view, which may be
chosen to reflect different types of document neighborhood
relationships.
Figure 2 illustrates a Topic Time Coordination operating
on five distinct TS views from this corpus, named TS-views
1 to 5, corresponding to time spans 1990-1993, 1990-1997,
1990-2001, 1990-2005 and 1990-2008, respectively. In the
map graph views, each vertex denotes a document, and is
linked through an edge to its nearest-neighbors in a Delau-

152

nay triangulation of the projected points.
Consider a specific paper related to an information retrieval system, entitled ´Visualization for the Document
Space´. This document has been selected on the TS-view
1, relative to 1990-1993, as shown in Figure 2(a). With
the Topic Time Coordination active, its selection implies in
generating topics from this document in the current view,
and from the same document and its neighboring documents
in the remaining map views.
Notice how document neighborhood changes over time,
and likewise the related topics. In TS-view 2 (Figure 2(b))
the topics extracted refer to query data, information visualization and world wide web visualizations, which
suggests papers addressing visualization of web query results. In TS-view 3 (Figure 2(c)) the extracted topics suggest content-based image retrieval. On TS-view 4 (Figure 2(d)) the topics refer toinformation visualization and
knowledge visualization; whereas in TS-view 5 (Figure
2(d)) the topics, again, involve the terms information visualization and knowledge visualization.
Figure 3 illustrates a Topic Time Coordination between
two TS-views, one with papers from CMV 2003, and the
other with papers that appeared in CMV from 2003 to 2008.
Figure 3(a) shows the selection of a paper on CMV models in the first TS-view. This selection activates the Topic
Time Coordination on three different maps of the second
TS-view.
Each view depicts the same underlying map, employing
different types of vertex connections to convey distinct relationships among documents. Figure 3(b) shows a map
of the TS-view 2 (2003 to 2008) where each paper is connected to its 2-nearest neighbors in the projected 2D space.
The topics extracted refer to coordination model and devise. Figure 3(c) shows a map of the same TS-view where
papers are connected based on a Delaunay triangulation of
their projected points. Notice that a different set of topics
is identified as document neighborhood changes: the topics
extracted in this map refer to coordination exploration, coordination models, devise and improvise.
Alternatively, users may also explore paper neighborhoods as defined in the original document vector space. In
the map shown in Figure 3(d), the graph edges connect each
paper to its 2-nearest neighbors in the original document
vector space. Now, the generated topics are coordination
exploration and devise. The fact that these topics are similar to those obtained from the neighborhood evaluated on
the projected space is indicative of a good projection, one
that preserves the original similarity relationships.

(a) Time span 1 - CMV from 2003.

(b) Time span 2 - CMV from 2003 to 2008
(2-nn in R2 ).

(c) Time span 2 - CMV from 2003 to 2008 (Delaunay Triangulation).

(d) Time span 2 - CMV from 2003 to 2008 (2-nn in RN ).

5

Conclusions

Figure 3. Topic Time Coordination between
two TS-views of papers from the CMV conference, using different neighborhood relationships. a) documents from CMV 2003 selected; b) 2-nearest neighbors in R2 ; c) Delaunay Triangulation; d) 2-nearest neighbors
in RN .

We introduced a new coordination approach called Topic
Time Coordination to aid in the exploration of document

153

(a) Time span 1 - 1990 to 1993.

(b) Time span 2 - 1990 to 1997.

(c) Time span 3 - 1990 to 2001.

(d) Time span 4 - 1990 to 2005.

(e) Time span 5 - 1990 to 2008.

Figure 2. Topic Time Coordination among five TS views of papers published from 1990 to 2008. The
corpus includes papers from IEEE Vis, CMV, IV and IEEE InfoVis.

154

collections over time. This approach departs from a document selection input in a map view relative to an initial
time-span, and generates topics for the selected documents
and their neighborhood in other views relative to subsequent
time spans. The purpose is to depict the time evolution of
specific topics in a collection. For topic detection, we introduced a new algorithm based on term covariance analysis.
Nonetheless, any term-based topic detection strategy can be
employed with this framework.
Our examples illustrate that the approach is useful both
in the analysis of static collections and of evolving document sets. For the latter, it reveals how newly published
documents relate to the original ones on a particular topic,
and brings up novel subjects related to them. If a document
group selected in one projection splits in a later time span,
it suggests the emergence of new topics in that knowledge
domain. If a group of documents remains cohesive and the
topics remain the same (or similar), it suggests topics reaching maturity over time.
We believe that the ideas introduced in this paper may
provide an underlying framework for valuable tools to
speed up the evaluation of document collections and the
analysis of evolving knowledge domains or events reported
in textual form.

6

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

Acknowledgments

[14]

This work is supported by FAPESP (the State of
S˜ao Paulo Research Funding Agency) grants 2008/046228, 2008/09487-1, 2007/04241-1 and CNPq (the Brazilian Research Funding Agency) grants 305861/2006-9,
484256/2007-6.

[15]

References

[16]

[1] K. W. Boyack, B. N. Wylie, and G. S. Davidson. Domain
visualization using VxInsight for science and technology
management. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 53(9):764–774,
2002.
[2] C. Chen. Information Visualization: Beyond the Horizon.
Springer-Verlag London Ltd, 2004.
[3] C. Chen. Searching for intellectual turning points: progressive knowledge domain visualization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA, 101 Suppl 1:5303–5310, April 2004.
[4] C. Chen. Citespace ii: Detecting and visualizing emerging
trends and transient patterns in scientific literature. J. Am.
Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 57(3):359–377, 2006.
[5] C. Chen, Y. Chen, and R. C. Maulitz. Understanding the
evolution of nsaid: A knowledge domain visualization approach to evidence-based medicine. In P. I. Conf. Inf. Vis.
(IV’05), pages 945–952, Washington, DC, USA, 2005. IEEE
Computer Society.
[6] N. J. Eck, F. Frasincar, and J. Berg. Visualizing concept
associations using concept density maps. In Proc. Conf. Inf.

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

155

Vis. (IV ’06), pages 270–275, Washington, USA, 2006. IEEE
Computer Society.
D. M. Eler, F. V. Paulovich, M. C. F. de Oliveira, and
R. Minghim. Coordinated and multiple views for visualizing text collections. In Proc. Conf. on Coord. Mult. Views
in Exp. Vis. (CMV ’08), pages 246–251, July 2008.
S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. Themeriver: Visualizing thematic changes in large document
collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, 2002.
A. Heijs. Requirements for coordinated multiple view visualization systems for industrial applications. In Proc. Conf.
on Coord. Mult. Views in Exp. Vis. (CMV ’07), pages 76–79,
Washington, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society.
O. Hoeber and X. D. Yang. Exploring web search results
using coordinated views. In Pr. Con. Coord. Mult. Views
Exp. Vis. (CMV ’06), pages 3–13, Washington, DC, USA,
2006. IEEE Computer Society.
A. A. Lopes, R. Pinho, F. V. Paulovich, and R. Minghim.
Visual text mining using association rules. Comp. & Grap.,
Sp. Issue Vis. Anal., 31(3):316–326, 2007.
K. Mane and K. Borner. Mapping topics and topic bursts in
pnas. In Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc. of USA, volume 101, pages
5287–5290, 2004.
F. V. Paulovich, L. G. Nonato, R. Minghim, and H. Levkowitz. Least square projection: a fast high precision multidimensional projection technique and its application to
document mapping. IEEE Trans. Vis. and Comp. Grap.,
14(3):564–575, 2008.
F. V. Paulovich, M. C. F. Oliveira, and R. Minghim. The projection explorer: A flexible tool for projection-based multidimensional visualization. In Proc. Braz. Symp. Comp.
Grap. and Im. Proc. (SIBGRAPI ’07), pages 27–36, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil, 2007. IEEE CS Press.
C. Perez and A. Antonio. 3D visualization of text collections: An experimental study to assess the usefulness of 3d.
In Proc. Conf. Inf. Vis. (IV ’04), pages 317–323, Washington, USA, 2004. IEEE Computer Society.
C. Seeling and A. Becks. Analysing associations of textual
and relational data with a multiple views system. In Proc.
Conf. on Coord. Mult. Views in Exp. Vis. (CMV ’04), pages
61–70. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
A. Skupin. A cartographic approach to visualizing conference abstracts. Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE,
22(1):50–58, 2002.
A. Spoerri. Coordinating linear and 2d displays to support
exploratory search. In Proc. Conf. on Coord. Mult. Views in
Exp. Vis. (CMV ’07), pages 16–26, Washington, USA, 2007.
IEEE Computer Society.
S. D. V. Thai, S. Handschuh. Tight coupling of personal interests with multi-dimensional visualization for exploration
and analysis of text collections. In P. I. Conf. Inf Vis. (IV
’08), pages 221–226, Washington, DC, USA, 2008. IEEE
Computer Society.
J. Wise. The ecological approach to text visualization.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
50(13):1224–1233, 1999.
W. Zhu and C. Chen. Visual analytics: Storylines: Visual
exploration and analysis in latent semantic spaces. Comput.
Graph., 31(3):338–349, 2007.

