2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

A Study on Effective Visual Communication Method with the ‘Pictomation’
Contents in Augmented Reality Environment
1st Ho-Sung Myung, 1st Byung-Gook Lee, 2nd Hyung-Woo Kim, 2nd Shang-Hyun Kang
1st Dept. of Visual Contents, Dongseo Univ. 2nd Dept. of Multimedia Design, Dongseo Univ.
mhs0825@gmail.com, lbg@dongseo.ac.kr, soundorange@yahoo.com,
alienkang@hotmail.com
corresponds to a contents element must be composed
systematic and efficiently and the core of the
interaction is accuracy and effectiveness of
communication through the information.
The public sign using pictogram must be produced
to find easily public facilities like a subway and a
bathroom regardless of preceding studying or
background knowledge, and maintain the objectivity
for an unspecific majority.
The users have a propensity to accept visual
information with an experience. But in most cases, the
information is recognized differently as experience of
each person and difference of culture. Therefore, we
need some education for the public communication.
Specially, in the modern society of global age, human
interchange is activated and there are various cognitive
dissonance by language, custom and cultural difference
of each country etc.
In order to reduce these errors, Korean agency for
technology and standards had fair about Korean
Standard (KS) of 335 pictograms for native and
foreigner
Therefore, we need some research which is to
improve efficiency of visual communication and
overcome difference of culture to make full use of
pictogram.
Information-oriented society of today demands
instinctive and effective methods and objective and
flexible visual communication method to embrace
multi-cultural between human being and medium.
In this paper, after re-interpreting the form element
of existing pictogram with communication medium, I
presented the method which everyone understand the
information intuitionally. I re-made existing pictogram
with animation which put emphasis on accurate
operation and conduct elements which could
experience from life, and I named it Pictomation
(Pictogram + Animation). The animation was
integrated with augmented reality Technique which is
piled up reality and 3D imagination objects in order to

Abstract
This paper analyzes visual communication elements
of pictogram, and proposes efficient expression method
in argument reality environment. Pictogram should be
recognized the meaning by everybody in the world, and
must be designed with fairness and objectivity as visual
communication medium with correct information for
unspecific users. Pictomation in this paper is produced
by animation with grafting together actions that could
find within standard pictogram and culture in order to
elevate information transmission realization to user,
and expressed with augmented reality technology
which is applied in various study fields. Augmented
Reality offers human-computer interaction for method
that can prove user realization about visual
information of three-dimensional space based on
reality environment as user-contents information
communication medium.
Pictomation uses various pictograms that can see
everywhere in order to utilize by marker. And you can
experience contents with Pictomation that is
manufactured under AR environment through UMPC
or PDA. Pictomation can increase effect about visual
communication, and gives user freedom of selection
that can forecast kind of contents. This paper tried to
integrate amused element through contents with
multimedia elements and real-time interaction, and
find the method for effective communication with users
through Pictomation in augmented reality.
Keywords --- Pictogram, Visual Communication,
Augmented Reality, ARToolkit

1. Introduction
The communication between the human being and
medium is a kind of interaction between the
information element which accomplishes a contents
and the human being. The information which
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.104

274

maximize the effectiveness of visual communication,
and I made ‘Pictomation’ contents with the animations.
The formation of this thesis is illustrated as below;
In chapter 1, the object, method and range of this
study was described.
In chapter 2, definition of pictogram as visual
Language was explained,
In chapter 3, effective visual communication
method with Pictomation was explained
In chapter 4, Introducing and embodiment process
about ARToolkit for Augmented Reality Contents was
explained
In chapter 5, conclusion and hereafter research was
explained.

the pictogram is used for nonverbal communication
which is free and easy from language in
internationalization society.
The conditions and functions of pictogram as visual
language is illustrated as below

2. Pictogram as visual language

Must be read quickly, easily, and exactly.

2.1. Definition of pictogram

Must be delivered meaning easily.

The pictogram is a compound word of ‘picto’ which
means and telegram which means the picture and a
symbol and picture to be recognized meaning of the
object easily and quickly as to be expressed
symbolically thing, Act, Fact, and etc.

Must be considered the brief expression and an
esthetic characteristic.

Figure 1. Pictogram of Australia natives

Figure 2. Functions of Pictogram as Visual
Language – Guidance Function

Table 1. Conditions of Pictogram as Visual
Language
CONDITIONS OF PICTOGRAM
Must be popular, common, and convenient to use.

Must be induced the act of consumer to original intent.

Also the pictogram is a kind of graphic symbol and
visual language to be recognized the meaning of object
easily in numerous communication methods, and gets
through the meaning with shape.
The Pictogram is an effective communication method
to understand a meaning of object immediately and
internationally as visual language which was produced
systematically for anyone who did not receive any
education before.

2.2. Conditions and Functions of Pictogram

275

Figure 3. Functions of Pictogram as Visual
Language – Command Function

2.3. An Object to use pictogram
This research has the object to grope for a feasible
and various approach method without getting out of the
object of pictogram as method for visual
communication.
Pictogram must be designed to put into action in
recognizing correct meaning by user. We can see the
variation of pictogram through various media recently.
The attempt through modification of graphical
elements cannot be approached to functional essence of
language.
We need theoretical approach in order that pictogram
is recognized as a language, not simple form element.
And pictogram should be approached as a media in
scope of identity of the essence.

Figure 4. International Standardization
Pictogram

3. Effective visual communication method
Human thinking is about objects in the world that
we know, and targets or incidents should exist for the
thinking. We can recognize and think about that
because there are the targets and the incidents.
Visual elements of pictogram should be expressed
and reconstituted in common experience, not creation a
new one.
In this research, I abstracted the meaning which
communicates with pictogram from linguistic elements.
And I expressed a noun in linguistic elements as visual
elements, a verb in linguistic elements as animations.
In this paper, I made the Pictomation with the most
common 12 pictograms at public places.
The figure 3, 4 is an example to make Pictomation
with `Drinking Fountain' which are an international
standardization pictogram.

Figure 5. Pictomation
First, I abstracted ‘man’ and ‘water’ from
linguistic element in ‘a man is drinking water’ and
expressed it as visual elements. Second, I made an
animation with behavior elements which is ‘drink’.
The feature of the Pictomation is expressed with figure
6.

276

4. Augmented reality environment embodiment
With advancement of technique, the virtual reality
increases immersion in cyberspace to the user, and the
limitation of expression is disappearing.
On the other hand, Augmented Reality has more
good point then virtual reality because of connecting
between virtual space and real space.
In this paper, I used ARToolkit which is one of
developing tool for augmented reality to develop
Pictomation contents.

Figure 6. Features of Pictomation

Table 2. Detail Features of Pictomation

Figure 7. Augmented reality contents with
ARToolkit

DETAIL FEATURES OF PICTOMATION
VISUAL
Communica ACTION
tion
Elements
VISUAL
LANGUAGE

Experiment
al
Elements

Keep visual communication
identity by abstracting
nouns

CULTURE

Overcome limitations of
multicultural

EXPERIENCE

Quick communication from
experience

HUMOROUS

curiosity induction about
information through
amusement elements

METAPHOR

Emotional communication
through metaphorical
expression.

Cultural
Elements

ARToolkit is software which can develop the
augmented reality through mark tracking with camera.
This was developed by Hirokazo Kato at HIT
laboratory in 1999, and announced at SIGGRAPH in
the same year for the first time. After this, ARToolkit
was distributed common people with upgrade version,
is administered in official web-site.
The embodiment principle of ARToolkit is to
recognize only black and white color with making
binary code of original pattern marker. It abstracts the
contour of markers from image changed binary code.
And the location between maker and camera can be
calculated numerically with ARToolkit library from
the abstracted contour. In this, we can know distortion
information of maker’s image with calculated
numerical value. And it makes calibration distorted
maker’s image to match the original form with the
distorted information and reorganization the marker
using comparing calibrated marker’s image with
registered maker. And it makes mapping each image
on the center of the recognized marker.

Animation which keeps
objectivity by abstracting
verbs

Pictomation makes static and dynamic element of
noun and verb elements which is abstracted from
linguistic elements, and try to give emotional
expressions with amusement elements based on
experience and culture.
I expect that user getting information can overcome the
limitation of time and space with the animation which
is made of the method.

277

The new pictogram maker supply the role of visual
communication like existing pictogram maker. The
new pictogram maker is more people-oriented design
then existing pictogram maker which is computeroriented.

Figure 8. ARToolkit Basic Principles
When I registered maker, I had problem about
cognitive rate. The problem was that the date was not
created correctly because of light environment. But I
solved the problem with adjusting binary code
threshold.
Next problem was that user could not know what
marker pattern was recognized because the maker
offered basically from ARToolkit was not matched
with contents.

Figure 11. Pictomation contents using
desktopPC
User accepts pictogram information primarily, and
then uses the Pictomation through devices like UMPC.
Figure 12. shows interactions between UMPC
installed ARToolkit and registered maker.

Figure 9. The marker pattern offered basically
from ARToolkit

Figure 12. Pictomation contents using UMPC

Conclusions
Pictomation contents that can be used by
unspecificness user give user correct information with
objectivity for effective visual communication. In this
research, the constituent element of ‘Pictomation’ was
not against the rule of standard pictogram, and the
realistic motion of the character drew user interest.
Also the visual information of Pictomation could

Figure 10. The Pictogram marker pattern

278

expect to reduce a mistake of information
reorganization because the Pictomation was made with
experience in life.
The visual communication with the Pictomation in
augmented reality was designed newly to be
recognized the maker very well by computer as well as
user. That made synchronization between contents and
marker, and could keep pictogram identification as
well as make full use of the identification.
We are in ubiquitous environment now. So I expect
that user make effective communication with
pictograms that can see in our lives with mobile
computer like UMPC, PDA etc.

Acknowledgements
This research was financially supporting by the
Ministry of Education, Science Technology (MEST)
and Korea Industrial Technology Foundation (KOTEF)
through the Human Resource Training Project for
Regional Innovation.

References
[1] ARToolkit url: http://www.friedbertschulze.de/mixedreality/technic.html
[2] ARToolkit basic principles url:
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/artoolkit/
[3] Pictogram Design. Yukio Ota, Kashiwashobo, Tokyo,
1987.
[4] Sign Image Symbol. Gyorgy Kepes, George Braziller,
New York, 1966
[5] M.Billinghurst, A.Cheok, S.Prince, H.Kato. Real World
Teleconferencing. In Proceeding Computer Graphics and
Applications 2002. Vol 22, IEEE, 11-13. November 2002.
[6] Daniel Wagner. Towards Massively Multi-User
Augmented Reality on Handheld Devices. In Proceeding 3rd
International Conference on Pervasive Computing 2005. 208219. May 2005.

279

