2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualizing Query Occurrence in Mobile Web Search Interfaces
Tomi Heimonen, Harri Siirtola
Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction (TAUCHI), Visual Interaction Research Group
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Tampere, Finland
{tomi.heimonen, harri.siirtola}@cs.uta.fi
the relevance of the results. In these cases users must rely
on different strategies for deciding which pages to view.
The text summary approach has been adopted also in
mobile Web search interfaces with very few
modifications. However, there are several challenges
specific to mobile Web search that are not adequately
met by current interfaces. Strategies that work on the
desktop, such as opening results in multiple tabs, are
cumbersome to use in mobile browsers. In addition,
browsing the actual resulting Web pages is more
expensive than on the desktop, both in terms of time and
data transfer. We present a visualization approach that
facilitates result evaluation by displaying the frequency
and distribution of query term co-occurrence across the
result document. We provide the results from a user
study where two alternative visualization designs were
evaluated in mobile Web search scenarios. Our research
questions were: (1) are the visualizations considered
useful aids for mobile Web search, and (2) which
visualization design do the users prefer?
Our results indicate that the majority of the
participants preferred the proposed visualizations to the
traditional search result list. They function as
unobtrusive, on-demand visual aids for relevance
disambiguation, especially when the textual descriptors
provided by the search engine are uninformative.

Abstract
Mobile Web search engines represent retrieved
results using primarily text based result surrogates.
Users could benefit from information visualization
techniques that provide more information about the
results as basis of relevance judgements. We present a
query-biased visualization approach that incorporates
query occurrence visualization into the conventional
mobile Web search interface. Textual and graphical
versions of the design were evaluated in a study with 18
users. Eleven of the participants preferred either one of
the visualizations to the traditional search interface. The
results suggest that the key benefit of the proposed
visualization is its unobtrusiveness. It does not distract
from normal use yet when necessary it can be used to
help with relevance assessment, for example when the
search engine fails to provide good result descriptors.
However, the utility of the proposed query occurrence
visualization is dependent on how well it matches the
user’s mental model and existing search strategies.

1. Introduction
The conventional ordered search result list has
prevailed as the principal search result presentation
approach. After years of practice, Web users have
become highly accustomed to selecting a web document
based on its position in the search result list, along with
its title, text summary (snippet), and Web address.
However, as users are not informed about the
characteristics by which the results are selected and
sorted, they must trust the search engine to be both
optimal and impartial in its selection of results. In some
cases, it is easy for the user to see that the search engine
has produced highly relevant results for the given query.
For example, when the user submits the query “cnn
news” and the CNN News website is listed first among
the search results, the user can be assured that his or her
goal was fulfilled. Nevertheless, with a more open-ended
task, such as finding information about the features of
various new mobile phones, it is more difficult to judge

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.16

2. Related work
This work belongs to the area of document
visualization techniques [3, pp. 409-410]. The simplest
form of document visualization in the search context is
the use of a one-dimensional indicator, e.g. a filled
rectangle, to represent the overall relevance of the
document to the query. A common data-to-visualization
mapping is to use the frequency and distribution of query
terms in the result document. These query-biased
approaches can be divided into two categories:
visualization at the result set level and visualization of
specific results. Techniques that address the whole result
set convey an overview of the relationship between
query terms, their combinations and the result set, for
example, by showing the most frequent terms in result
documents [9] or using Venn diagrams to show the effect
645
639

better performance or response from users, whereby we
should seek to complement rather than replace them.
Visualizations should be compact and provide enough
information for relevance assessment without requiring
extensive interaction. Against these limitations, it
appears that it is not practical to show individual query
term frequencies and locations, or use enhanced
thumbnails. One possible trade-off is to show the
occurrence of all the query terms in the same context
while attempting to leverage the strengths of the
thumbnail approach, a design that we experimented with
in our previous work [6]. It shows the frequency of
search terms occurring in the same context in the whole
result document, which is represented by a documentshaped icon that is divided into four rows, corresponding
to four equally sized parts of the result document. The
number of graphical marks on rows depicts the
frequency of query occurrences in that part of the result
document. Our earlier evaluation showed that users
appreciated the ability of the visualization to help them
in spotting low-relevance results, found it unobtrusive
and easy to interpret [6].
We retained the four-part division of the result
document in this design but increased its granularity. In
the previous version we showed four distinct levels,
whereas the current approach is more fine-grained. Each
section of the document takes up two lines from the
document-like shape, and each query occurrence is
mapped to one or multiple pixels on the line, depending
on the dimensions size of the visualization. In addition,
we designed a text-only version of the visualization as an
alternative. The two visualizations designs are illustrated
in Figure 1.

of query term selections on the results [11]. While these
techniques can be useful in desktop result exploration,
they are unlikely to be suitable for mobile use.
TileBars is a distinguished example of result specific
visualizations [5]. It represents a retrieved document
using a horizontal bar to indicate its total length, and the
frequency and location of query terms is shown by
colour density inside the bar. Hoeber and Yang [8]
proposed a similar design called HotMap, where each
result is annotated with heat map visualization. Query
terms are represented using a set of rectangles (one per
query term) that change colour as a function of query
term frequency in the title and snippet. Their evaluation
shows that HotMap resulted in fewer low-relevance
results being considered and was preferred by the users
over a Google-like result interface. Anderson and others
[1] used pie charts to display query term distribution in
the result document. Their extensive evaluation showed
that design provided a good cognitive fit between the
user’s task and visualized information. While the above
techniques use an abstract presentation of the result
document, thumbnail-based approaches have also been
considered. These enhanced document thumbnails
provide both an overview of the result document as well
as highlight the locations of the query terms within the
document. Woodruff and others [14] discovered that
their enhanced thumbnail approach provided the most
consistent performance for Web search tasks, when
compared to plain thumbnails and Google-like interface.
Supporting the relevance evaluation of individual
search results is identified as a challenge for mobile
search interface interaction design [10, p. 274], however
result specific visualizations have not been widely
studied in the mobile context. Milic-Frayling and others
[12] proposed an interface for mobile Web search that
annotates a Web page preview with query term locations,
and provides an indication about which page segment is
likely to provide the searched for information. The user
can drill down to a sub-region of the page in which the
query terms are subsequently highlighted. A user study
showed that their interface outperforms a normal Web
browser interface when the ‘hot’ page segment is
correctly identified. Also text-based techniques have
been proposed, whereby the textual result surrogates are
replaced or complemented with additional information.
Church and others [4] proposed a solution where the
snippet is replaced with keywords extracted from related
search queries. Their approach provided a better balance
between information richness and screen space use than
the traditional interface, however, it was judged to
present less useful information.

Figure 1. Side-by-side comparison of graphical
visualization (a) and textual visualization (b)
The graphical version provides an overview that can
be processed quickly (i.e., are there many or few hits),
while the text-based visualization allows for quickly
spotting the exact amount of hits. These two approaches
attempt cater to two different types of search: directed
informational and non-directed of informational search
goals [13]. In the former the user is interested in an
unambiguous piece of information, e.g., “Marilyn
Monroe’s given name”. In the latter the user is looking
for information about a more broadly defined topic, i.e.,
“tell me something about X”.
In the current approach, query term occurrences, or
the appearance of all query terms in the same context, are
computed on a sentence-by-sentence basis, based on the
plain text parsed from the HTML content of the result
documents. If the parsing cannot be done (e.g., the server
does not respond in time or the content type is not text) a
semi-transparent, cross-shaped icon is displayed inside
the rectangle. In the search result page, the visualization

3. Mobile query occurrence visualization
Earlier work on result specific search visualization
indicates that designs should attempt to match the user’s
cognitive view of search. The visualization should also
be unobtrusive so that it does not interfere with the
evaluation of the textual features. Replacing the
traditional textual result descriptors is unlikely to provide

640
646

with the interfaces to create four set-interface that were
randomly assigned to the participants. In the last phase
the participants always carried out the same set of tasks
(set 3). Each task was prefaced with the phrase “Find
Web page(s) with information about”. The tasks were
designed to conform to the informational search goal
category [13]. The tasks sets were thematically balanced
to contain tasks with differing information needs.

is integrated to the left-hand side of result elements
(Figure 2), enabling the user to quickly switch attention
between the visualization and the textual result
descriptors. Additionally, the shape of the visualization
allows it to flow with the text without being obtrusive.

Table 1. Task sets used in the experiment
Task set 1
1. Political career of
president Martti
Ahtisaari.
2. Ethnic restaurants in
Helsinki.
3. Local bus timetables.

1.
2.

Figure 2. Query occurrence visualization
integrated into a mobile Web search interface

3.

4. User study

Task set 2
1. This year’s Big Brother
award.
2. Bakeries in Tampere.
3. Contact information
for the Finnish
consulate in Los
Angeles.
Task set 3
Recipes for panna cotta.
Weekend weather forecast in the greater
Tampere region.
Tourist attractions in London.

We strived for increased ecological validity in the
test setting to account for the differing search strategies
and preferences users may have. Participants were free to
utilize their own queries and reformulate the search
terms as many times as they felt necessary to complete
the task. In order to emulate a realistic mobile context of
use, task completion time was limited to three minutes.
Measures such as precision and recall are generally
used when measuring the objective performance of
search interfaces. In this study, we utilized a forcedchoice paradigm [7] whereby participants had to choose
which interface to use. This gives an indication of how
useful the participants found the interface – the choice to
use an interface is made based on its perceived utility
and usefulness. The primary reason we opted for this
solution were the concerns that have been raised in
previous studies regarding the suitability of objective
metrics for evaluating mobile search interfaces, and the
lack of correlation between objective and subjective
metrics observed in many user studies.
In addition, we used a 38-word list with 19 positive
words (e.g. useful, fast) and 19 negative words (e.g.,
confusing, useless) to elicit user feedback. The words
were a subset of the list in the Desirability Toolkit,
proposed by Benedek and Miner [2]. For the purposes of
the study the words were translated into Finnish. We also
collected feedback with questionnaires that elicited
subjective preferences on the perceived ease of use,
comprehensibility, and usefulness of the visualizations.

4.1. Participants
Eighteen participants (10 male, 8 female) aged 19 to
30 (mean = 23.3 years, SD = 3.3) volunteered for the
user study. The participants were undergraduate students
at a local university. All participants were experienced,
daily computer and Web users with over 5 years of
experience. They also reported having extensive
experience as search engine users. Web search engines
were used daily by 16 out of 18 participants and 17 out
of 18 had used them for more than 5 years. All
participants used Google as their primary search engine.
Mobile phones were used daily by 17 out of 18
participants, and 17 out of 18 participants had used
mobile phones for more than 5 years. A smartphone
(e.g., Nokia N-series or iPhone) was used by 11 out of 18
participants. Mobile Web was used at varying frequency
by 14 participants (3 daily, 3 weekly and the rest less
frequently) and Google Mobile Search, the search engine
of choice, by 6 participants.

4.2. Design
The user study was organized using a within-subject
mixed design with one independent variable, the search
result interface with two levels: (1) enhanced with
textual query occurrence visualization, and (2) enhanced
with graphical query occurrence visualization. The order
of interface presentation was counterbalanced to control
for learning effects. The participants carried out three
tasks in random order with both interfaces and three
tasks with the interface of their choice (textual, graphical
or no visualization) for a total of 9 tasks (Table 1). The
effect of tasks and domain expertise was controlled by
using two distinct task sets (1 and 2) that were paired

4.3. Procedure
In the introduction to the experiment, the
participants were verbally introduced to the topic of the
user study (“to compare two different mobile Web search

641
647

interfaces”) and the background questionnaire and
informed consent forms were administered. Next, they
were briefed about the structure of the experiment and
tasks. Participants were instructed to carry out searches
using their own query terms and to “select the best result
or results, imagining that you were in a situation where
you need the information you are requested to seek.”
During task completion the participants were able to
view the Web pages the search results pointed to, but
were instructed to not browse beyond the initial page. A
check box used for indicating relevant results during task
completion was added below each result (see Figure 2).
Before the task phase, the participants were
introduced to the Web based search interface, the mobile
phone, and the visualizations. They also carried out an
exercise task with the interface. The order in which the
visualization were introduced to the participants was
counterbalanced. Next, the participants carried out test
tasks with both visualization interfaces, filled in a
subjective feedback questionnaire about the interface and
selected representative words describing their user
experience. In the final block of tasks they were forced to
choose which interface to use prior to each of the three
tasks. At the end they filled in a final questionnaire. This
was followed by a semi-structured interview, where the
participants were quizzed using open-ended questions
targeting e.g., the result evaluation decision-making
process, the overall usefulness of the visualization and
their rationale for choosing which visualization to use.

participants preferred neither of the visualizations,
indicating that they did not find the proposed
visualization approach to provide enough benefit to be
used in a mobile Web search interface. Participants were
also able to select which visualization technique to use in
three search tasks (for a total of 54 selections across 18
participants), along with the option to use the traditional
search interface. Participants’ selections were quite
evenly distributed across the graphical and textual
visualizations, with the former comprising 46% of
selections and the latter 39% of selections. In 15% of the
cases the participants chose to use the unmodified search
interface. The data shows that visualization preference
had a significant impact on interface selections (p < 0.05,
Fisher’s exact test). Table 2 shows the overall
visualization preference and the number of participants
that selected predominately (i.e., at least two selections
out of three) the given visualization interface.
Table 2. Interface selections (rows) by
preference (columns), as # of participants

Selected
Graphical
Selected
Textual
Selected
neither

4.4. Apparatus

Prefers
Neither

6

-

2

-

3

3

1

1

2

5.2. Subjective responses
After task completion the participants answered
subjective feedback questions related to the
visualizations using a 5-point bipolar scale ranging from
positive (1) to negative (5). Figure 3 shows the responses
as box plots with median and the interquartile range. We
did not observe a statistically significant difference on
the ratings between the visualizations, although there is a
trend suggesting that the participants rated the text-based
design more positively overall.
In the final questionnaire the participants answered
statements (Figure 4) contrasting the visualizations using
a 7-point scale ranging from textual design (1) to
graphical design (7). Again, a statistically significant
difference to the hypothesized median (4 = no
perceivable difference between visualizations) was not

5. Results
5.1. Visualization preferences
During subjective feedback collection, participants
were requested to state their visualization preference.
The options that were provided were: (a) Graphical
visualization, (b) Textual visualization, (c) Neither, and
(d) No preference. Most of the participants (11 out of 18)
preferred either of the two visualization designs, with 7
out of 11 preferring the graphical version. Seven

2

Prefers
Textual

Six out of seven participants who preferred the
graphical visualization also chose to use the graphical
visualization interface when given the option. The same
holds for those participants that preferred the textual
visualization, as three participants out of four chose to
use the textual visualization interface. It is noteworthy
that none of the participants that preferred the graphical
visualization chose the textual interface in the last three
tasks, and vice versa. On the other hand, participants that
reported preferring neither of the visualizations varied
fairly evenly in their choices.

The experiment was conducted using a Nokia N95
mobile phone1 and its Web browser application. The
device was connected to the Internet using a wireless
local network connection. The search user interface was
implemented as an HTML-based dynamic Web
application. The underlying search engine and
visualization algorithm were implemented in Java. The
visualization was integrated into the mobile Web
interface as an image resource sized 13 by 37 pixels (see
Figure 2). The visualizations were generated on-demand
with a 4.5 second timeout for fetching and parsing the
content. The searches were carried out using the
Microsoft Live Search API2.

1

Prefers
Graphical

http://www.nokia.com/n95/
http://dev.live.com/livesearch/

642
648

observed, although the results suggest a slight overall
trend towards the graphical design.

Table 3. Most frequently selected words.
Textual

Graphical

Simple (9)
Easy to use (9)
Usable (9)
Understandable (9)
Plain (8)

Simple (11)
Clear (10)
Understandable (10)
Easy to use (8)
Useful (7)

The participants were interviewed about their
experiences with using the visualizations, their suitability
for mobile Web search, and the rationale the participants
used when choosing which visualization interface to use.
The majority of participants (15) had mixed reactions
about the visualizations. In general, they found the
visualizations to be useful in some situations, for
example when the search engine does not provide a
snippet text for the result. Unsurprisingly, the
participants used the textual descriptors as the key
relevance information when evaluating the results. The
visualizations were used, but primarily in a supporting
role to disambiguate the relevance of results when e.g.,
the title or URL failed to provide a clear enough
assessment. Several participants noted that they would
likely find the visualization more useful in the long run –
they were used to their normal way of searching and
would need to learn to trust the visualization. Participants
that preferred the textual design noted the numbers fit
their way of thinking better (“Somehow, I understand
better with numbers”), while participants preferring the
graphical design found it simpler and faster to process
during result evaluation (“Graphical … was simpler. I
don’t need to know the exact number of hits …”).
Another key concern in terms of usefulness and the
ability to trust the visualization were the occasional
mismatches between the textual descriptors and the
visualization. Six participants noted that they found it
misleading when the visualization showed no or very
few query occurrence hits for a result although the result
otherwise seemed like a good fit for the query. This is
linked to a similar concern raised by a few participants
regarding the underlying premise of the visualization.
For these participants the query-biased approach was not
particularly useful, as they were more concerned with the
overall relevance of the result than the frequency and
distribution of query occurrences in the result document.

Figure 3. Responses to subjective feedback
questions (box plots show median and IQR)

Figure 4. Visualization design comparison (box
plots show median and IQR)
Participants’ selections from the list of positive and
negative words were equally distributed with 120 word
selections for the textual visualization and 119 for the
graphical one. Participants made on average 3.9 positive
(SD = 2.7) and 1.8 negative (SD = 1.9) selections when
judging the textual design and 4.39 positive (SD = 3.6)
and 1.22 negative (SD = 1.4) selections for the graphical
one. We did not measure a significant difference in the
number of overall, positive or negative word selections
between the visualizations. However, participants made
more positive (Md = 3) than negative (Md = 1) word
selections when describing the graphical visualization (z
= 2.43, p = 0.012; Wilcoxon signed-rank test). A
significant difference was not found in the case of the
textual visualization in this regard. Based on the word
selections, both visualizations prompted quite similar
experiences; words such as “simple”, “easy to use” and
“understandable” were among the most frequently
selected expressions for both (see Table 3). It is
noteworthy that the top ranking words do not contain any
negative words for either visualization design.

6. Discussion
Our study attempted to answer two research
questions. First, we wanted to know whether the
proposed visualizations are considered useful aids for
mobile Web search, and second, which visualization
design do the users prefer and why. Answering the first
question required us to evaluate the visualization across
several dimensions, such as perceived usefulness, added
distraction to task, ease of use and comprehensibility.
While our participants did not find the visualizations
unequivocally useful, they saw potential in the proposed

643
649

designs, specifically in circumstances where the search
engine fails to produce informative result descriptors. It
is likely that prolonged use of the visualization would
help them integrate it better into their result evaluation
strategies. Subjective feedback also helped us identify
areas of improvement in the algorithm used to compute
the data for the visualization. Seeing the frequency and
distribution of query occurrences was confusing for some
participants, or it was considered superfluous
information that could be better communicated using a
single relevance measure. Accordingly, many
participants treated the visualization in a binary manner,
whereby populated, ‘full’ visualizations indicated good
results and ‘empty’ visualizations indicated poor results,
suggesting that the frequency of hits was more important
to users than their distribution. One solution is to provide
a summary visualization of the overall frequencies and
only provide the distribution information upon request.
Mismatches between the textual descriptors and the
visualization were also found problematic. These issues
may have been caused by the difficulties we had with
reliably parsing plain text from HTML source, which
could result in ‘empty’ visualizations. A possible
solution is to only show the fine-grained visualization
when we identify a query phrase that is likely to occur in
the same context in the document, and the plain text can
be cleanly parsed. Nevertheless, users are required to
adopt more elaborate search strategies to make full use of
the visualization (e.g., sometimes a single hit can
highlight a good result if the query is very specific).
The graphical version of the visualization was the
more preferred design overall, however the effect is not
so strong as to invalidate the textual version altogether.
According to the interviews, the participants’ a priori
preference towards textual or graphical presentation, as
well as the salient features of the designs themselves
influenced their visualization preference. Some
participants appreciated the numbers because they
facilitated a more analytical approach to result
evaluation, while others preferred the simplicity and
‘glanceable’ overview provided by the visual bars.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the UCIT Graduate School
in User-Centered Information Technology.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Conclusions

[10]

We introduced a query occurrence visualization
approach for mobile Web search interfaces and evaluated
two alternative designs in an 18-participant user study.
The majority of participants preferred the proposed
visualizations to the traditional search result list, with the
graphical version being received more favourably than
the textual alternative. However, the participants raised
concerns about the utility of the underlying design,
suggesting that in many cases a simple estimate of
relevance is more useful than the ability to see the
frequency and distribution of query occurrences.
However, the key benefit of the visualization is its
unobtrusiveness as a visual aid for identifying either
potentially relevant results or ignoring low-relevance
results, especially when the search engine fails to
produce informative result descriptors.

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

644
650

Anderson, T. J., Hussam, A., Plummer, B., and Jacobs,
N. Pie Charts for Visualizing Query Term Frequency in
Search Results. In Proc. of the 5th international
Conference on Asian Digital Libraries. LNCS vol. 2555.
Springer-Verlag, London, 2002, 440-451.
Benedek, J. and Miner, T. Measuring Desirability: New
Methods for Evaluating Desirability in a Usability Lab
Setting, A paper on the Desirability Toolkit. In Proc. of
Usability Professionals Association Conference 2002.
Card, S., Mackinlay, J. and Shneiderman, B. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, CA, USA, 1999.
Church, K., Smyth, B., and Keane, M. T. Evaluating
interfaces for intelligent mobile search. In Proc. of the
2006 international Cross-Disciplinary Workshop on Web
Accessibility (W4a): Building the Mobile Web:
Rediscovering Accessibility? W4A, vol. 134. ACM, New
York, NY, 2006, 69-78.
Hearst, M. A. TileBars: Visualization of term distribution
information in full text information access. In
Proceedings of CHI ‘95, ACM, 1995, 59-66.
Heimonen, T. and Jhaveri, N. Visualizing Query
Occurrence in Search Result Lists. In Proc. of the Ninth
international Conference on information Visualisation.
IEEE Computer Society, 2005, 877-882.
Heimonen, T., Aula, A., Hutchinson, H., and Granka, L.
Comparing the User Experience of Search User Interface
Designs. In Proceedings Workshop on User Experience
Evaluation Methods in Product Development (in
conjunction with ACM CHI '08), 2008.
Hoeber, O. and Yang, X. D. The Visual Exploration of
Web Search Results Using HotMap. In Proc. of 10th
International Conference on Information Visualisation,
IEEE Computer Society, 2006, 157-165.
Hoeber, O. and Yang, X. D. Evaluating the effectiveness
of term frequency histograms for supporting interactive
web search tasks. In Proc. of the 7th ACM Conference on
Designing interactive Systems. ACM, New York, NY,
2008, 360-368.
Jones, M. and Marsden, G. Mobile Interaction Design.
John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
Langer, L. and Frøkjær, E. Improving web search
transparency by using a Venn diagram interface. In Proc.
of the 5th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer
interaction. ACM, New York, NY, 2008, 249-256.
Milic-Frayling, N., Sommerer, R., Rodden, K., and
Blackwell, A. SmartView and SearchMobil: Providing
Overview and Detail in Handheld Browsing, F. Crestani
et al. (Eds.): Mobile and Ubiquitous Information Access
Workshop 2003, LNCS 2954, 2004, 158-171.
Rose, D. E. and Levinson, D. Understanding user goals
in web search. In Proc. of the 13th Intl. Conference on
World Wide Web. ACM, New York, NY, 2004, 13-19.
Woodruff, A., Rosenholtz, R., Morrison, J. B., Faulring,
A., and Pirolli, P. A comparison of the use of text
summaries, plain thumbnails, and enhanced thumbnails
for Web search tasks. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 53, 2
(Jan. 2002), 172-185.

