2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

The Sensitive Tapestry
Built Architecture as a Platform for Information Visualization and Interaction
Sandra Wipfli, Christian Schneider
Chair for Information Architecture, ETH Zurich
{wipfli@arch.ethz.ch, christian.schneider@arch.ethz.ch}
which way one perceives his/her own body spatiality and
motility in physical and augmented environments, and
how that particular kind of experience, created by this
juxtaposition evokes one’s awareness of his/her motility
in the public, or the instrumentality of the specific place.
The installation uses body-input as a non-traditional user
interface that was developed to familiarize the students
with a novel, computer-assisted design process within
the field of architecture. The prototype was tested on
ETH’s Zurich, Science City campus with the aim to
generate a novel experience of the potential when
physical architecture and digital information are merged.
It represents a tapestry that can be projected as an
interactive installation into the urban context. A pattern
is generated dynamically following the pedestrians’
movement in front of a building. In this case the
pedestrians become active participants that influence the
generative process and make the pattern change. We
suggest that this kind of display can enrich the casual
interaction of people nearby and this might enhance
social awareness and engagement. The experience we
present here can assist designers in understanding
difficulties and issues that need to be taken into account
during the design of an interactive urban project of this
nature.

Abstract
This paper presents ‘The Sensitive Tapestry‘, an
interactive installation using body-input as a nontraditional user interface. The technical basis for this
kind of media-enabled environment is a thermal imager
that captures the activities in public areas at a large
scale. The installation has been developed as a
prototypical example in architectural education at the
ETH Zurich, Science City. The aim of the project is to
generate a novel experience, which shows the potential
of merging physical architecture and digital information.
The article newly develops architecture as an interface
that reveals information about the building itself, its
occupants, and/or its environment. It describes the
research that employs design experimentation and
information visualization with the use of computersupported, interactive, visual representations of abstract
data to amplify cognition. This questions the way in
which one perceives the own body spatiality and motility
in physical and augmented environments and how the
particular experience created by this juxtaposition
evokes one’s awareness of the motility in the public. The
paper suggests that introducing this kind of display in a
social scenario can enrich the casual interaction of
people nearby and this might enhance social awareness
and engagement.

The paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we
address some aspects of pervasive systems in physical
environments that have been developed to create
opportunities
for
informal
interactions
and
communication as well as the project phases of the
workshop ‘The Sensitive Tapestry’ in detail. In section 3
the technical specification, the equipment and processes
of the installation are described in detail. In section 4 we
outline potential areas of investigation in architecture.
The paper concludes with final remarks for future work.

Keywords: Information Visualization, Ambient
Intelligence, Augmented Architecture, Interactive
Environments

1. Introduction
At all times buildings communicate their function
and status through a language of visual signs. Today,
commercial hubs are showcases of giant movie graphics
that fly across several stories, though more often than not
there are advertisements that disregard what is happening
within the building itself. What if a sign did not simply
tout new advertising, but instead reveals something
unique about the building, its occupants, or its
environment? What if the building could respond, in real
time, to the movement of people, the weather, or the
whims of bystanders? The interactive installation ‘The
Sensitive Tapestry’ takes architecture and uses it as an
interface, which divulges information on the building, its
occupants and its surroundings. The question arises in
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.82

2. Urban Environment as a Platform for
Information Visualization and Interaction
Urban landscapes are places where people spend a
significant amount of time; they contribute to our own
formulation of identity, community, and self. The built
environment with its architectural space is the
framework where our cultures develop and transmit;
through its rules and norms social interaction is
expressed, shaped and reproduced [1]. In this regard,
492
486

merging physical architecture and digital information in
an urban setting can support new ways of experiencing
the built environment. It may provoke new types of
social encounters and interactions between people as
well as interactions between people and the physical
environment.

rather ambitious and required a lot of intense work from
the students. As the workshop had limited amount of
time, the goals and the technical means to reach these
were clearly stated up front.

2.1. Related Work
Recent research has addressed some aspects of
pervasive systems introduced in physical environments.
However, most of them have been developed for
workspace environments to create opportunities for
informal interactions and communication, such as “Hello
Wall” [2], or “Wallmap” [3]. Other large interactive
systems, for instance “The Opinionizer system” [4] and
“Dynamo” [5], have been introduced into social settings
with the aim of extending existing activities and
practices or to help people to initiate a conversation with
people standing beside them. Also, the Equator research
group produced a range of urban experiences such as
“Can you see me now?” [6] However, in those outdoor
proposals, the user or player has to carry portable devices
to trigger the digital media or connect online. A few
urban projects have been designed to use body
movement, and gestures of the user could activate the
digital media. For instance some works of the MexicanCanadian artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer, such as “Urban
Scan” and “Body Images” [Figure 1] use body-input
interaction (in this case user’s shadows) creating a direct
relation between the human body, the technology
interface and the urban space [7]. However, in those
cases the pattern of interactions is informally described.

Figure 2 Interactive Installation, Prototype
ʻThe Sensitive Tapestryʻ

Figure 3 Feedback through captured warmth
escaping through opening doors of the building
The step from having the tracking data to actually
developing a visual feedback was not automatic, but one
where students were to make design decisions about the
type of visual feedback they would derive from their data
input. This step was worked on in the open source
application Processing. The students applied their
knowledge in Java, the Processing embedded scripting
language to turn the data into a visual feedback
according to some formal logic that would work well
with the architectural form of the chosen front of the
building and/or the input of passing people.

Figure1 Under Scan, 2008

2.2. Workshop ‘The sensitive Tapestry‘
The generation of an immediate visual feedback
through movement and interaction in a defined space
was the focus of a workshop within architectural
education, titled under the title ‘The Sensitive Tapestry’.
Rather than exploring synthetic motion, the students
were assigned to design a generative tapestry, which
interacts with both passing people and the attributes of
the building. To participate in the workshop no special
technical knowledge was needed. Thus the task was

3 Technical Specification
The technical basis for this kind of media-enabled
environment is a thermal imager that captures the
activities in a public space at a large scale. This allows
the system behind the space to track the items, and
therefore also the visitor’s movement and actions. IR
Filter, or background subtraction based tracking
487
493

techniques, would suffice to track pedestrian movement.
We are also particularly interested in the building itself.
Therefore, the radiance of heat from the pedestrians as
well as the warmth escaping through opening doors of
the building are captured by a thermal imager.

3.

3.1. Captured Input
The captured information and the projection have to
be synchronized in order to get an accurate projection.
The video signal from the thermal imager is transferred
via USB cable to the computer. The Processing
application accesses the video signal. In a first step, the
video input is warped into a texture. The warped image
typically contains the building façade. By warping the
image we get rid of perspective distortion. That allows to
access pixel data within an orthogonal grid. In a second
step, the tapestry is generated within Processing, using
the pixel data from the warped texture as directing input.
In this phase, a visual interpretation of input data takes
place.

The warping technique described above could be
enhanced with real-time computer vision techniques,
so that synchronization between thermal imager and
projector works automatically. Based on this, a
‘thermal imaging torch’ could be built. Wherever
one points the torch at, it reveals the usually
invisible thermal aspect of the surface that is pointed
at.

3.3. The Calibration Tool
The definition and calculation of the warping
matrices was outsourced a as separate tool: The
Calibration Tool. This was done in order to release the
main application of more computationally intensive
tasks. The Calibration tool consists of a 2048x768 full
screen window, spanning two screen of 1024x768
resolution. Usually the left side of the application
appears on the computer screen, whereas the right side,
holding the beamed image is projected by the attached
projector. As illustrated below, building boundaries are
selected by means of a quad. Corners of the quad are
dragged onto the corners of the façade with the mouse.
The corresponding transformation matrix is calculated.
Then the corners of the beamed image are also dragged
onto the building. This results in a second transformation
matrix. Both matrices can be saved in a text file. Both
text files are used in the Processing application for
accurate warping. We need two transformation matrices,
one for the camera, and one for the projector to
annihilate perspective distortions of both devices. They
cannot have the same position and direction. The
calibration tool was programmed using openframeworks.

3.1. Generated Output
The third step consists of projecting the tapestry
onto the building. The output is also warped. This
ensures an accurate projection. The required
transformation matrices are gathered beforehand by a
separate tool, which is referred to as the Calibration
Tool. With the same tool, static building information
such as positions and dimensions of windows and doors
where gathered and simply saved as a black and white
texture, which served as secondary input besides the
thermal image. This three-step process enables to show
things in space where they really happen. The warping
within Processing is accomplished by applying the
applyMatrix() method, which is computationally
expensive as it is implemented in software. In general,
the produced tapestries touched the limit of performance.
The use of Processing is nevertheless justified in the
needs of a smooth as possible learning curve for students
with no or little programming experience. This enabled
them to concentrate more on visual performance than on
technical issues.

Figure 4 Camera Image and
Warped Camera Image

A 10’000 ANSI-lumen projector was used for
projection. While we use this technique for an artistic
installation, it opens up a range of practical applications
within architecture:
1.

2.

Measuring and displaying The Tapestry could
automatically measure attributes of the façade and
display them accordingly. This would enable an
intuitive approach on proportions of the building.
Architects could see things on the façade that are
usually only revealed in plans.

Figure 5 Generated Tapestry,
Warped Tapestry and Projected Image

Possible alternations/renovations could be visualized
directly on the building to get a glimpse how things
would look like.

488
494

4 Areas of Investigation in Architecture

Acknowledgements

This kind of outdoor real-time visualization
comprises numerous advantages compared to other
conventional digital façades. For example, it is
inexpensive, the visual variability of themes is high and
the flexibility of space enticing. As a next step it could
deliver interesting conclusions as to the use of external
space as well as to non-visual information within a
building, e.g. heat loss, humidity, and so forth. As with
all external projections, ‘The Sensitive Tapestry’ is also
constrained by the proportion of light, making the
visibility of the projection dependent on the exposure to
a different source of light and the time of day.

The project was kindly supported by Testo AG,
Mönchaltorf, Switzerland. We especially thank Urs
Schneider, Sales Manager and Daniel Kiener, CEO of
Testo AG Switzerland for their kind help with the
organization, instruction, and delivery of the thermal
imager.
The following students participated in the workshop
‘The Sensitive Tapestry‘:
Daniel Theiler, Sarina Fahrni, Johanna Bock,
Nicolas Burckhardt, Daniele Grambone, Prisca Hirstein,
Andrea
Schregenberger,
Nina
Villiger,
John
Lemmenmeier, Lutz Kögler, Tanja Risch, Marina
Liopis-Valaison, Sabine Schaub, Nadia Vitali, Alex
Woods, Thomas Hungerbühler, Giuseppe Gaudente,
Matthias Knuser, Marc Pancera, Steve Gallay, Samuel
Rey, Arno Bruderer, James Yeo, Georgois Mavridis,
Tom Dowdall, Fabian Troxler, Dominik Aegerter,
Fabian Oesch, Julian Amman, Johannes Pöschl, Jonas
Krieg and Lukas Treyer.

Conclusion
We introduced the interactive installation prototype
‘The sensitive Tapestry’. The example shows a new way
of utilizing the potential of the built environment as a
platform for information visualization and interaction. It
is direct and informative, as well as ambient and
evocative. It addresses the person in the interactive space
but still reacts to the visitors’ inhabitation of the
surrounding area. The case of interaction design is part
of the larger design challenge. It is a complex cognitive
issue, that links information and effects with physical
artifacts obvious to the people in the space. Since the
common interaction metaphors, such as buttons or touch
screens are deliberately excluded, the user will not react
to such an environment with the usual technological
expectations. Rather, the installations are experimenting
with a new way of thinking: the interactive experience is
part of the natural exploration of the physical space.
However, not only the physical properties of a
display can have quite profound effects on the way it is
used in a public setting, the effort will also vary
depending the nature of the space where it is located
(e.g., a park, street, bus stop, etc.). Each space has
different attributes, as do the people, who are interacting
with it [8]. Accordingly, it is possible to argue that
different kinds of surfaces will be needed to augment,
support and enhance what people already do in that
specific space [9]. It seems that the ability of an
interactive large urban display to increase social
interaction depends on the social atmosphere where it is
located, the type of audience and cultural background,
the complexity of the prototype, and the environment
where it is located.
Hence, large interactive public-displays have the
potential to generate social interaction and awareness
around them. However, in situating them in different
locations and social environments, diverse behaviors and
reactions will emerge from the public, which the authors
could not necessarily predict.

References

489
495

[1]

Hillier, B. & Hanson, J. The social logic of the space.
Cambridge University Press, London. 1984.

[2]

Streitz, N. A., Rocker, C., Prante, Th., Stenzel, R., &
Van Alphen, D. Situated Interaction with Ambient
Information. Facilitating Awareness and Communication
in Ubiquitous Work Environments. In Proc. HCI
International 2003, Crete, Greece. 2003.

[3]

McCarthy, J. F. Using Public Displays to Create
Conversation Opportunities. Intel Research, I. (Ed.) In
Workshop on Public, Community and Situated Displays
at CSCW 2000. New Orleans. 2002.

[4]

Brignull, H., & Rogers, Y. Enticing People to Interact
with Large Public Displays in Public Spaces. In Proc.
Interac'03. Zurich, September 2003, 17-23. 2003.

[5]

Izadi, S., Brignull, H., Rodden, T., Rogers, Y.,
Underwood, M. Dynamo. A public interactive surface
supporting the cooperative sharing and exchange of
media. In Proc. User Interfaces and Software
Technologies (USIT'03). Vancouver. 2003.

[6]

Equator. Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration on
integration of physical and digital interaction.
http://www.equator.ac.uk/

[7]

Lozano-Hemmer, R. Under Scan. Large-scale Public Art
Installation. Trafalgar Square, London. 2008.

[8]

GAVER, W. Technology Affordance. In EuroPARC. R.
X. C. (Ed.), Rank Xerox Cambridge EuroPARC. 1991.

[9]

Briones, C. LED-s Urban Carpet. A portable Interactive
Installation for Urban Environments. MSc thesis. 2006.

