2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Knowledge Visualization and Business Analysis: Meaning as Media
Stefan Bertschi
University of Zurich & loginb.com
stefan.bertschi@loginb.com
reveal the construction and reconstruction of meaning
in knowledge transfer.
The present discussion starts where the previous
papers ended: with the conclusion that knowledge visualizations “aim particularly at portraying the reconstruction of patterns” [2, p. 384] and with the insight
that “collaboration is important for social negotiation
on meaning, for the testing of ideas, and the exchange
and discussion of different perspectives.” Anyone who
wants to “transfer knowledge to one or more individuals, with similar or different backgrounds” [4, p. 31],
has to be aware that visualizations need to be shaped
and customized “in a way that the recipient can reconstruct knowledge as intended by the sender” [4, p.
54]. Therefore, I start with a first thesis: To understand
the process of internal competence (mind) and external
performance (organizational, social) a view on meaningful expression is needed.
In the following sections I discuss perception, metaphor, business analysis and media, each in the context of meaning. Finally, I present some preliminary
conclusions and an outlook that can be drawn from this
discussion.

Abstract
This paper is the third in a series of papers designed to explore how “metaphorical meaning” can be
used to support knowledge visualization. Within the
present discussion the following is assumed: To understand the process of mind and organizational performance a view on meaningful expression is needed. In
order to approach this collaborative task, knowledge
visualization is seen as “business analysis” and the
concepts of metaphor and media are seen as a carrier
of meaning. This is meant to provide a better understanding of the visualization of knowledge for necessary alignment in business analysis.

1. Introduction
“Everything that is visible hides something else that
is visible.” René Magritte [1, p. 64]
This assumed paradox lies at the heart of a series of
three papers which comes to an end with the present
paper. As will become clear, I am far from reaching a
final conclusion. However, by introducing a new comparative application of knowledge visualization, i.e.
business analysis, the third paper opens the discussion
in a new direction.
The first paper examined the metaphorical face of
knowledge visualization and discussed the interrelation
of so-called “linguistic learning” and mediation of
knowledge through visualization [cf. 2]. According to
this approach, knowledge is constantly being reconstructed through communication and the use of existing
linguistic structures and patterns of learning. Hence,
knowledge visualization aims at augmenting communication via graphic means which mediate knowledge
through metaphors. The second paper discussed
whether metaphor, meaning and perception are sufficiently dealt with in knowledge visualization [cf. 3].
Following the constructivist stance developed in the
first paper, I introduced a deconstructivist approach to
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.37

2. Meaning and perception
At present, I aim to extend the discussion on human
perception and the feasibility of transfer intended in
knowledge visualization (presented at the “Symposium
on Knowledge and Argument Visualization” in 2007),
rejoin the debate on metaphor and introduce a connection between visualization and business analysis. The
current approach centers on the “process of people
collectively using […] assumptions in [perceiving and;
S.B.] interpreting each other’s actions” [5, p. 36]. Whereas individuals carry private representations, only mediating structures (or symbols which connect individuals) allow for private representations being aligned
among individuals. It is significant that perceptions and
subsequent private representations are constructed and
reconstructed within the singular realms of individuals
or, with other words, in their minds [cf. 5, p. 42].

486
480

meaning of visualization [cf. 3, p. 342]; whilst meaning
“is central to understanding human behavior.” [9, p.
xii] In the communication process our aim is to understand both sender and recipient, or even more, to connect them properly and align their understanding.
However, consensus is not guaranteed, not even alignment is ensured. It is simply known that perception
differentiates according to significance and meaning.
Therefore, to constitute a meaningful practice within
the transfer of knowledge, the interdependence of
meaning and perception has to be acknowledged and
understood.
In the previous paper I argued that the reasonable
approach to evaluate the mechanisms and effectiveness
of knowledge visualization has to be a type of reading
“texts” (of all sorts) and is meant to consider, reveal
and, finally, understand the underlying circumstances
and contexts in which they are produced and received
[cf. 3, p. 343]. This “understanding” was modeled on a
process of learning [cf. 2; 18, p. 455]. Hence, there are
sender and recipient, and the attempt to reveal how to
analyze “meaning” in this mediating structure. For this
purpose I use a diagram from Claude E. Shannon and
Warren Weaver’s “Mathematical Theory of Communication” (see Figure 2). In this depiction, “noise” is certain distortions and errors due to the transmission. Because of noise, “the received message exhibits […] an
increased uncertainty.” In their aim to solve the technical problem of transmission and to design the most
accurate communications channel, Shannon and
Weaver considered noise to be “undesirable uncertainty.” [10, p. 19] Additionally, noise is important for the
semantic problem and the effectiveness problem of
communication [cf. 10, p. 4]; both the contents and the
quality of transmission are affected by noise.

Rubin’s vase is an outstanding example for perception. Even though this figure-ground illustration is
much older, it was Danish psychologist Edgar Rubin
who made the “vase/profile illusion” famous in 1915
(see Figure 1). What is since known as “Rubin’s vase”
offers a mental choice of two equally valid interpretations: “we can alter our perception by directing our
attention to either vase or face” [6, p. 154; cf. 7]. Attention can select either object as the “figure”, thereby
fundamentally distort perception.

Figure 1 Rubin’s vase
The preferred identification of objects is connected
with the ability to perceive at will and to “differentiate”
between “figure” and “background”. In an experiment
focused on these selection processes, it was argued
whether one chooses those attributes of an object
which are immediately relevant to the task in hand [cf.
6, p. 155]. It seems quite reasonable that task-relevant
or meaningful attributes are selected at first. A second
example is given in Akiro Kurosawa’s film “Rashomon” (1950): A crime, involving rape and murder, is
reported by four witnesses, each from their own point
of view [cf. 8, p. 93], and each telling a completely
different story. Giving four viewpoints of the incident,
the movie leads to questions like: Which witness is
telling the truth? What is the right perception? How
can one tell?
These “multiple perceptions” lead to a second thesis: To align individual representations a “flow of significance” is needed. In order to understand the symbols that allow individuals to be linked [cf. 5, p. 36],
underlying processes require the use of linguistic learning. One learns the meaning of a symbol by finding out
“what it is” and then by creating a version of that symbols’ meaning [5, p. 43]. Cultural representations are
perceived and comprehended by exposure to the mediating structure and by applying meaning to this structure [cf. 5, p. 47]. This leads on to the argument that
functional perception is dependent on the intended

Figure 2 General communication system
Moving on from Shannon and Weaver’s depiction
of a general communication system, one can tentatively illustrate the relationship of the resulting “two”
meanings (see Figure 3). Knowledge has to be reconstructed by the recipient; because the recipient has
to accord meaning to the incoming message, he or she
is not at all passive, “but participates in the structuring
of external reality.” [3, p. 345] Therefore, the recipient
is also the interpreter and confronted with “new” noise.

481
487

meanings in different contexts, again distorting perception. However, the conception of metaphor as the
“fountain of meaning and truth” plays a foundational
role in human understanding [cf. 3, p. 344]; it plays a
central role in the way we make sense of the world.
Because “there is no accepted understanding about the
way metaphors work” [13, p. 393], I understand metaphors to be a capability to comprehend and shape experience, “like seeing or touching or hearing, with metaphors providing the only way to perceive and
experience much of the world” [14, p. 239]. It is understood that “metaphor […] results in an active and
unified apprehension of knowledge.” [13, p. 394] Metaphors organize knowledge.
As a return to the previous papers, I subscribe to
images of organizations (and organizing) adhering to a
linguistic model (hence, linguistic learning in [2]) or,
in other words, “language-based conceptualizations of
organizations” [13, p. 395, 401]. It will soon become
clear why “organization” is introduced as a central
aspect of the present paper. In this logic, knowledge
visualization contributes to the analysis of meaning in
communication. With its intangible connection to metaphor [cf. 4; 16], “the essence of […] [knowledge visualization] is understanding and experiencing one
kind of thing in terms of another” [14, p. 5]. By visualizing complex issues, these processes of understanding
and experiencing are embedded in the way we act, interact and – again – make sense of the world.
In regard to organizations a plausible example is
found in the metaphor “Work is a game.” In this metaphor, work is seen as a game, including players, moves
and strategies. Thereby, metaphors “help to structure
beliefs and guide behavior in organizations, express
abstract ideas, convey vivid images that orient our perceptions and conceptualizations, transfer information,
legitimate actions, set goals, and structure coherent
systems” [13, p. 396]. Furthermore, they can be used to
highlight and reproduce practices and patterns, perceptions and reactions as well as norms, motives and
meanings.

This noise is now to be found on the right side of the
receiver. It is worthwhile noting that Shannon and
Weaver’s original noise is still included in the “visualization” which takes place between sender and receiver.
In this two-part process, i.e. presentation by the sender
and subsequent separate formation of representations
by the recipient, the problem of “noise” and “meaning”
is encountered as a problem of two noises and two
meanings.

Figure 3 Two meanings
The analysis of this communication process should
address the “how” (how does it happen?), which in a
common understanding leads to the “why” (why does
it happen?), instead of the “what” (what happens?), and
a deconstructivist approach has proven to be a suitable
tool for addressing construction [cf. 3, p. 343]. But it is
the “why” which has to direct our approach to the
“how” of the mediating structure and perception [cf. 5,
p. 44]. The structure linking sender and recipient could
be the metaphor (as indicated in [2] and [3]), at the
same time providing an answer on the “how” of the
mediating structure (i.e. its functioning), and on how to
address the problem described. This means in short and
wrapped in a third thesis: Metaphor is typified language use and a means to simplify the distinction of
noises and meanings.

3. Meaning and metaphor
Metaphors may establish conventional meanings
and work as “instructions” for agreement [cf. 5, p. 42].
They provide previous constructions and evoke a connected mental picture which, in the best of cases, is
identical or at least significantly approximated in sender and recipient. At the same time, metaphors “admit
endless or at least open-ended interpretations”; what
they mean or communicate is never fixed in advance
[11, p. 205; cf. 12]. Even metaphors cannot ensure that
meaning is transferred identically to all recipients. This
is illustrated in the following example: In Nigeria
people use the metaphor “She is my bedbug” as a term
of affection for their lover because bedbugs are considered cute. Given our, say Western European presuppositions about bedbugs, the same metaphor would
express something very different: saying that he or she
is a nuisance [cf. 11, p. 208]. This example shows
same content that can have different metaphorical

4. Meaning and business analysis
Seeing meaning both as part of one’s mind and as a
social construction is an aspect that is also contained in
understanding “business analysis”. According to this
approach, differences in meaning and difficulties in
understanding have to be overcome or analysis and
visualization will inevitably fail. This holds especially
true for the two meanings involved in the transfer of
knowledge (see Figure 3). They emerge because the
corresponding qualities are “constructed rather than
deciphered” [15, p. 751], resulting in the fact that
meaning is emergent and individual cognitive

482
488

Business analysis as it is understood here is the
“management of meaning” which is used “when communicating organizational change to inform and inspire”, to “facilitate knowledge production” and to
“create shared experiences” [13, p. 405]. The process
of analyzing and steering has to consider how identities
are created (minds, roles, images etc) and how meaning is framed within processes (stories, slogans, artifacts etc). A practical example is the construction of
vision and mission statements. It is crucial to understand that this cannot be a one-way process: organizational members are “shaping and being shaped in their
everyday actions, interactions, and relationships” [13,
p. 407, my italics]. Conversation and collaboration are
paramount; and these mediated exchanges of different
perspectives facilitate the connection with business
analysis because “metaphor is seeing something from
the viewpoint of something else” [16, p. 170, my italics], e.g. seeing technology/change from the viewpoint
of business/organization and vice versa.
It is an outstanding capability of metaphors “to
create previously unapprehended relationships.” [13, p.
403, my italics] The metaphor’s relation to meaning
allows us to relate both metaphor and meaning to general connections and collaborations, as included in my
understanding of business analysis. Wherever a common understanding is sought, there is a need for
aligned meaning. Because sender and recipient have
their independent minds, it has to be taken into account
that “meaning exists outside discursive reproduction”
[13, p. 404]. Hence, one is thrown back to the problem
of at least two meanings.

processes differ immensely. In order to manage and
transfer knowledge, these processes of construction
and reconstruction need to be analyzed and understood.
Originally, knowledge visualization was set as a
“new field […] in the context of business knowledge
management.” [4, p. 52] I believe that this focus is too
restrictive, as there is more potential in the construction
and reconstruction of knowledge within a wider understanding of organization and collaboration. To reflect a
change for IV’09, the “Symposium on Knowledge and
Argument Visualization” has been renamed to “Knowledge Visualization and Visual Thinking”. For the intended connection with business analysis, I extend
knowledge visualization beyond the mere business
application and relate it to general organizational
realms and meaningful thinking about these realms. As
will become clear, the same applies to my understanding of business analysis.

4.1. Business analysis
Business analysis is commonly understood as an
analytical and consultative position, liaising between
the business side and service provision in organizations. It combines the analysis of customer requirements, the questioning of existing and prospective
processes, the structuring of and advice on change and
development; but business analysis is also concerned
with managing relationships and transferring knowledge within an organization. An even narrower definition limits business analysis to the smooth integration
of new technologies and business processes, translating
business requirements into IT requests.
The International Institute of Business Analysis
(IIBA), the leading professional association, defined its
field as follows: “Business Analysis is the set of tasks,
knowledge, and techniques required to identify business needs and determine solutions to business problems. Solutions often include a systems development
component, but may also consist of process improvement or organizational change.” [17, p. 12] Likewise,
their definition of the role of business analyst reads: “A
business analyst works as a liaison among stakeholders
in order to elicit, analyze, communicate and validate
requirements for changes to business processes, policies and information systems. The business analyst
understands business problems and opportunities in the
context of the requirements and recommends solutions
that enable the organization to achieve its goals.” [17,
p. 13, my italics] Determining solutions to organizational problems and identifying needs of stakeholders
are at the core of this profession. The business analyst
acts as a bridge between the involved parties, translating different views into one.

4.2. Context
It does not come as a surprise that the envisioned
alignment depends on the context in which one is supposed to analyze, interpret and execute it. Business
analysis, like knowledge visualization, depends on
awareness, perception and the recognition of meaning
[cf. 3, p. 345]. How is something done and why? Is it
able to fulfill its objectives? In both fields it is important to understand that the receiver is not a passive recipient of information but participates in the structuring
of knowledge; each recipient has his or her own mindset. These mind-sets involve complex subjective constructions which are constantly being modified in
communication. Knowledge visualization already
demonstrated awareness for the interpretational process
of meaning [cf. 4, p. 121], and the same should apply
to business analysis. Whereas the understanding of
needs for change is central in business analysis, communication and delivery are equally important. Without
understanding the meaning of these processes, their
communication is restricted, particularly if the need for

483
489

385]. These meanings have to be reflected in a “medium”, some kind of carrier or process interlinking
different views. Again, it leads to the question how
these meanings can be expressed and transferred efficiently and effectively. Thinking of richer means to
express knowledge, most prominently digital interactive media and Adobe Flash come to mind. As a technology that integrates audio, video and high-resolution
graphics, the defining characteristic of so-called “rich
media” is the following: it features dynamic motion
which can occur over time or as a direct response to
interaction. (The present paper merely points to such
media for demonstration, e.g. Adobe Flex or the more
visually rich ILOG Elixir, including 2D and 3D charts,
treemaps, map-based dashboards, organization charts,
gauges and Gantt charts.)
Microsoft PowerPoint, the standard tool for knowledge visualization, already “integrates visual media
into an overall structure of speech”, even though the
process of presentation is only “half-automated” and
relates on its “live” performance [20, p. 89]. This situation reminds of the business analyst, the collaborative
approach and its dependent performance of meaning.
Furthermore, the positive aspect of mediation technologies lies in the “dissolution of institutional boundaries
of knowledge” [20, p. 92]. Like in other computermediated communication, content (i.e. knowledge)
does not affect form. This versatility demands a “recontextualization” which in turn allows addressing the
problem of the two meanings.
Moving pictures, however, retain their context and
thereby constitute meaning, not the least because they
are the most common way one experiences the world.
With other words, “writing a caption under a picture is
not the only way to disambiguate it; turning a static
picture into an animated one might solve the problem,
too.” [21] Rich media might be such a solution: providing richer means to collaborate globally, leading to
meaningful information and facilitating an aligned understanding. Using the same data or information, in an
ideal future, “the [rich media] application [intuitively;
S.B.] adapts to the uses of that data, depending on who
is using the application.” [22, p. 5] However, the versatility (multiple contexts, meanings etc) remains a problem which has to be accounted for. Business processes
and their wider organizational variants are equally affected and relate these mediating structures to analysis
and visualization. Finally, it is this “knowledge transmission” [20, p. 91] which leads back to Magritte’s
“hidden visible” and to the beginning of the paper.

aligning different views prevails. Loaded with the task
of collaborative meaning management, choosing the
right mode of communication is essential to get appropriate information, to save time and money, to avoid
confusion and to obtain support from stakeholders.
Both knowledge visualization and business analysis
are about constructing and reconstructing (contextual)
meaning. Business analysts would have to inquire in
which situations and how they can apply and benefit
from knowledge visualization: How can visualization
and visual metaphors be used to improve their liaison
practice? Which issues and risks may emerge in this
context? What methods exist or need to be developed?
In this regard, business analysis would become a field
of application for knowledge visualization and a thorough discussion is needed. At present, I focus on mediated meaning as its precondition.
It is the “seeing something from another viewpoint”
knowledge visualization and business analysis have in
common. This leads to a fourth thesis: Both knowledge
visualization and business analysis address the question how different people are able to perceive the same
organizational “world” (i.e. knowledge) at the same
time. “[M]aking sense of ambiguous and complex situations through conversations and dialogue” becomes
increasingly important [19, p. 5]. On this note, the
business analyst is situated “in between” the heads
(mind, individual, sense, meaning) and the outside (environment, organization, situation, meaning). The same
applies to knowledge visualization which “aims to improve the transfer and the creation of knowledge” by
giving people “richer means to express what they
know” [4, p. 135, my italics]. These richer means refer
to a mediating process involving visualization; they
refer to means of communication and collaboration in
the context of meaning.

5. Meaning and media
The approach proposed here reflects the problem of
transfer as related to a “medium” or “carrier” of meaning [cf. 3, p. 343]. Metaphors act as carriers or “transporters of meaning” [9, p. 225]. Carriers facilitate a
common understanding because they are already situated in context [cf. 9, p. 232]. For instance, I have an
understanding of what “X” means to me personally
because someone was able to (visually) demonstrate
why. Hence, this approach is not merely based on what
is said and how it is said, but on why it is said and why
visualizations mean something. Such a view is pivotal
to understanding the subjective and contextual meaning of people’s experiences and to differentiate them
from noise.
In regard to aforementioned collaboration, it is particularly important to understand meaning [cf. 2, p.

6. Conclusion
The envisioned alliance of knowledge visualization
and mediated business analysis may not only have the

484
490

potential to solve “the predominant problems in organizations”, i.e. to communicate complex contents to
diverse audiences [4, p. 131], but to address problems
related to this transfer. Starting with perception and
meaning, I discussed the relevance of existing and new
components: metaphor, business analysis and media. I
underlined the need for a view on meaningful expression and the “flow of significance” in order to understand the process of mind and organizational performance, and to link these individual representations (or
minds). I reiterated the importance of metaphor as a
means to simplify the distinction of noises and meanings, and I combined knowledge visualization and
business analysis to address how and why different
people perceive the same meaning.
The process of construction and reconstruction has
to take place in a mediating structure, as a mediating
process. The resulting view on “rich media” originates
in the assumption that visualizations will lose their
character as static objects in a familiar sender-recipient
setting. Instead, they will increasingly “establish an
iterative, collaborative process where the visualization
(and new knowledge) is dynamically co-created.” [4, p.
140] Knowledge transmission, as the main conclusion
to this series of papers, means construction and reconstruction of meaning. The proposition of the present
discussion is “to understand” and more literally to
“comprehend the meaning of something” [18, p. 452].
In order to achieve comprehension, one needs a
process of learning about proper conversations and
collaborations, but has to keep in mind that both meaning and understanding are relational. Therefore, Magritte’s quote runs like a thread through the whole discussion. I would like to suggest further exploration of
how knowledge visualization and mediated business
analysis are related. Whilst the three-part series was
aimed at establishing a basis for such an endeavor, it
will have to take place in an applied setting. Knowledge visualization most definitely provides suitable
opportunities and contexts.

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

References

[18]

[1]

[19]

[2]

[3]

René Magritte. Magritte. Daniel Abadie and Patrick
Roegiers, Eds. New York, D.A.P. 2003.
Stefan Bertschi and Noah Bubenhofer. Linguistic
Learning: A New Conceptual Focus in Knowledge Visualization. In Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05). London. July 2005.
IEEE Computer Society Press. 383-389.
Stefan Bertschi. Without Knowledge Visualization?
Proposing a Deconstructivist Approach to Metaphor,
Meaning and Perception. In Eleventh International
Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’07). Zurich. July 2007. IEEE Computer Society Press. 342347.

[20]
[21]

[22]

485
491

Remo Burkhard. Knowledge Visualization: The Use of
Complementary Visual Representations for the Transfer of Knowledge – A Model, a Framework, and Four
New Approaches. D.Sc. thesis. Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology (ETH Zurich). 2005.
Nick J. Enfield. The Theory of Cultural Logic: How
Individuals Combine Social Intelligence with Semiotics to Create and Maintain Cultural Meaning. In Cultural Dynamics 12 (1). 2000. 35-64.
Jochen Braun. Computational Neuroscience: Intimate
Attention. In Nature 408 (6809). 2000. 154-155.
Edgar Rubin. Figure and Ground. In Readings in Perception. David C. Beardslee and Michael Wertheimer,
Eds. Princeton NJ, Van Nostrand. 1958. 194-203.
Jason Maratos. The Power of Myth as Metaphor. In
Group Analysis 39 (1). 2006. 87-99.
Fathali M. Moghaddam. The Individual and Society: A
Cultural Integration. New York, Worth Publishers.
2002.
Warren Weaver. Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Communication. In The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Claude E. Shannon and
Warren Weaver. Urbana, University of Illinois Press.
1964. 1-28.
Josef Stern. Knowledge by Metaphor. In Midwest Studies in Philosophy 25. 2001. 187-226.
Josef Stern. What Metaphors Do Not Mean. In Midwest Studies in Philosophy 16. 1991. 13-52.
Raymond Hogler, Michael A. Gross, Jackie L. Hartman and Ann L. Cunliffe. Meaning in Organizational
Communication: Why Metaphor Is the Cake, not the
Icing. In Management Communication Quarterly 21
(3). 2008. 393-412.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live
By. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 2003.
Joep P. Cornelissen. Beyond Compare: Metaphor in
Organization Theory. In Academy of Management Review 30 (4). 2005. 751-764.
Richard H. Brown. Social Theory as Metaphor: On the
Logic of Discovery for the Sciences of Conduct. In
Theory and Society 3 (2). 1976. 169-197.
International Institute of Business Analysis. Business
Analysis Body of Knowledge (BABOK). Version 1.6
Final. Toronto, IIBA. 2008 [cf. Version 2.0. 2009].
Thomas A. Schwandt. On Understanding Understanding. In Qualitative Inquiry 5 (4). 1999. 451-464.
Mark Easterby-Smith, Richard Thorpe and Paul R.
Jackson. Management Research. 3rd edition. London,
Sage. 2008.
Hubert Knoblauch. The Performance of Knowledge:
Pointing and Knowledge in Powerpoint Presentations.
In Cultural Sociology 2 (1). 2008. 75-97.
Kristóf Nyíri. Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Pictures. In
Wittgenstein Research Revisited. Conference at the
HIT Centre. University of Bergen. December 2001.
http://www.hunfi.hu/nyiri/nyiri_bergen_tlk.htm.
Erica Driver and Ron Rogowski. RIAs Bring PeopleCentered Design To Information Workplaces. Forrester Research. November 2007.

