Formalizing Analytical Discourse in Visual Analytics
Guoray Cai †
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Penn State University, University Park, PA

ABSTRACT
This paper presents a theory of analytical discourse and a formal

analytical discourse in Thomas and Cook [1].

model of the intentional structure of visual analytic reasoning
process. Our model rests on the theory of collaborative discourse,
and allows for cooperative human-machine communication in
visual interactive dialogues. Using a sample discourse from a
crisis management scenario, we demonstrated the utility of our
theory in characterizing the discourse context and collaboration.
In particular, we view analytical discourse as plans consisting of
complex mental attitude towards analytical tasks and issues.
Under this view, human reasoning and computational analysis
become integral part of the collaborative plan that evolves through
discourse.

2

Keywords: Analytical discourse, science of interaction,
human-computer collaboration
Index: H5.2 [User Interfaces]: theory and methods; I.2.7
[Natural Language Processing]: discourse; I.2.8 [Problem
Solving, Control Methods, and Search]: plan execution,
formation, and generation
1

INTRODUCTION

Visual analytics refers to the science and technology that support
analytical reasoning with visually presented information.
Although it shares similar interests with the traditional fields of
information science and information visualization, their focuses
are quite different at the current stage. One point of departure is
that visual analytics has a unique emphasis on the analytical
reasoning process within which human analysts perceive,
understand, and make sense of information. Such an analytical
reasoning process has been given a discourse-oriented view [1].
According to a view, analytical work on data consists of mixedinitiative dialogues (between an analyst and the data) as mediated
by visual representation of data on the interface. However, the
nature of such analytical discourse needs to be further elaborated
before computational support of such discourse can be developed.
There has been little foundational work that characterizes how
analytical discourses are structured, generated, and used in real
intelligence analysis.
In this poster presentation, I propose a formal theory of
analytical reasoning, based on the theory of collaborative plans
and collaborative discourse [2] [3] [4]. The application of this
theory is demonstrated by analyzing a problem scenario (see
figure 1 in the next page) that involves two emergency managers
(Jim and Jill) who discuss an evacuation plan in the event of
nuclear particulate release. The scenario reveals some of the
common characteristics of analytical discourse. In particular, a
reasoning process takes an evolutionary path which is constructed
over of the course of human-information interaction (rather than
pre-defined procedures). The scenario shows the potential of
using a variety of interaction methods (visual, verbal, gesture) to
achieve natural, multimodal communications for seamless
collaboration, and is consistent with the conceptualization of
†

Email: cai@ist.psu.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

HUMAN-INFORMATION DISCOURSE IN ANALYTICAL
REASONING

Analytical reasoning refers to the process that intelligence
analysts perceive, understand and reason about complex and
dynamic data in order to collect evidences for reaching
conclusions or judgment. The challenge of supporting analytical
reasoning is the most prominent in the identification of threats and
risks of terrorist attacks, protection of national borders and critical
infrastructure, and emergency preparation and response.
Typically, the issue under investigation is too large, and hence
requires examination of a set of smaller questions related to the
overall question. For each of these workable issues, an analyst
uses the available data (completed by assumptions) to perform
three common types of tasks: situation assessment, forecasting
threats and vulnerabilities, and developing options for action.
Studies on the nature of analytical processes revealed that analysis
is commonly an iterative and evolutionary process by which a
path is built from definition of the issue to the assembly of
evidence and assumptions to the articulation of judgments, with
the possibility of repeating such a path at the different levels of
abstractions or at the presence of new data or opportunities [5].
In order to support effective analytical discourse, a visual
analytic system must be able to harmonize many different insights
and compose multiple reasoning processes as well as managing
diverse types of reasoning artefacts. The development of such
system requires that we understand the nature of analytical
discourses and establish computational models and theories that
guide technological solutions.
3

MODELING STRUCTURES OF ANALYTICAL DISCOURSE

In our theoretical framework, human-information discourse in
analytical reasoning is modelled as the process of constructing a
collaborative plan by two or more participating agents. Following
the theories of collaborative discourse [2], we describes an
analytical discourse in terms of three related structures: (1) the
mechanical structure - the segmental structure of analytical steps,
(2) the intentional structure – the way that discourse purposes
relate, and (3) the focus of attention. Since analytical discourse
are task-oriented, there exists a close coupling between the
mechanical structure and the intentional structure such that each
discourse segment has an identifiable and recognizable purpose
(or discourse intention).
Like linguistic discourses, an analytical discourse is
fundamentally collaborative behaviour among participants, which
can be explained by the underlying plan of collaborative actions.
Based on this conception, the key for enabling an agent to
participate an analytical discourse is to recognize the plan of the
on-going collaboration and to advance the plan through
cooperation with others.
The nature of such collaborative plans has been characterized
by the “SharedPlan” theory of collaboration [3]. A SharedPlan
captures not only the knowledge of actions, but also the set of
mental states (intention, belief, and commitment) that the
participants hold towards the plan. A plan (or a subplan) becomes
a Full SharedPlan (FSP) when (1) participating agents have the

217

Jill: “Jim. There is a radioactive
particulate release at the Crystal
River Nuclear Power plant, and we
need to decide if evacuation is
required”
SYSTEM: [System displays location of
the Crystal River Nuclear Power
Plant, centrally] (M1)
Jim: “Show me the 10, 20, 30, and 40 mile EPZ zones around the plant.”
(pointing gesture reinforces which
plant)
SYSTEM: [System displays a series of
buffered rings around the region in
question]. (M2)
Jill: System, factoring in the current
wind condition, add a plume model
over this region.” [circle gesture
indicating area].
SYSTEM: [the system creates a plume
model of the radiation zone and
displays it over the EPZ zones.]
(M3)
Jim: “Based on our protective action
recommendations, we should
evacuate everyone within a 20mile EPZ plus those in the plume
trajectory.”
SYSTEM: [shows the evacuation
recommendation area, that is, the
intersection of the 20-mile buffer
zone with the plume zone ]
Jill: “I think we should use a 30-mile
EPZ zone, to increase our margin
of error.”
SYSTEM: [the system refreshes the
evacuation recommendation area
by merging the 30-mile buffer zone
with the plume zone ] (M4)
Jim: “OK. Jill”
Jill: “System, sound the evacuation
sirens and generate the EAS radio
notice; all remaining areas should
be instructed to shelter in-place.”
Jim: “Evacuation is likely to be difficult
here” (points to a location with
likely highway congestion).
[the
system
shows
SYSTEM:
population, evacuation routes, as
well as road constructions trouble
spots.] (M5)
Jill: The map indicates a lot of
construction here
SYSTEM: [highlights corresponding
areas on map as hot spots]. (M6)
Jim: I will go to this site [pointing to one
of the hotspot] to guide the
evacuation process.
Jill: Then let’s send the other field
team to that site [pointing to the
other hotspot] .
System: [shows the location and tasks
for Jim’s team and the other field
team] (M6)

M1

M2

agents have a Full SharedPlan (FSP) for identifying the
parameter. If the above conditions are not met, the plan is
considered only a Partial SharedPlan (PSP). A PSP represents an
ongoing discourse, while a FSP represents a completed discourse.
Following Lochbaum [4], the progression of a discourse can
be viewed as participants collaboratively evolving a SharedPlan
from a partial plan to a full plan. At the start of a discourse, the
SharedPlan is initially empty. As agents propose new initiatives
during the interaction, new plan nodes are introduced. The ‘root’
plan node represents the most encompassing goal mentioned so
far. If action of the root plan is complex, agents will elaborate it
on more details by selecting a recipe collaboratively. Then,
agents move their attention to the subtasks (as specified in the
recipe). If the value of a parameter is unknown, a subplan is
formed for identifying the parameter. If a subtask is not directly
executable (i.e. a complex action), a subplan will be formed for
performing this subtask. These subplans may themselves be
complex, and will become the subjects of further elaboration.
In the poster presentation, we will show a detailed analysis of
the problem scenario (Figure 1) and demonstrate how the
SharedPlan of the analytical discourse is recognized, represented,
and evolved over time. The plan becomes the knowledge
representation of the discourse context within which subsequent
communications are interpreted.
4

M3

M4

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Building on the collaborative discourse theory, we have argued
that analytical discourses are fundamentally collaborative
behaviour among participants, and the structure of the discourse is
governed by the plan of the underlying collaboration. This paper
contributes tot the science of visual analytics by one theoretical
construct with which an analytical discourse can be modelled.
We are working on extending the collaborative discourse
theory for the purpose of capturing the specific types of
collaboration in the intelligence analysis activities. Our work is
also likely to impact the science of interaction design. By
modelling the intentional structures of the discourse in analytical
reasoning, visual and analytical actions are given situated
meaning.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work is partially supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grants No EIA-0306845.
REFERENCES
M5

[1] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, "Illuminating the Path: The Research
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics," National
Visualization and Analytics Center, 2005.
[2] B. J. Grosz and C. L. Sidner, "Attention, intentions, and the structure
of discourse," Computational Linguistics, vol. 12, pp. 175-204, 1986.
[3] B. J. Grosz and S. Kraus, "Collaborative plans for complex group
action," Artificial Intelligence, vol. 86, pp. 269-357, 1996.
[4] K. E. Lochbaum, "A collaborative planning model of intentional

M6

structure," Computational Linguistics, vol. 24, pp. 525-572, 1998.
[5] R. J. Heuer, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis. Washington, D.C.:
US Government Printing Office, 1999.
[6] A. M. MacEachren and G. Cai, "Supporting Group Work in Crisis
Management: Visually mediated human-GIS-human dialogue,"

Figure 1 A scenario of visual analytic discourse (after [6])

Environment and Planning B-Planning & Design, vol. 33, pp. 435456, 2006.

shared beliefs that everyone intends and is committed to the
whole plan; (2) all actions on the leaf-nodes are basic actions; (3)
for each of the parameters, either that it is already instantiated, or

218

