FemaRepViz: Automatic Extraction and Geo-Temporal Visualization of
FEMA National Situation Updates
Chi-Chun Pan

Prasenjit Mitrat

The Pennsylvania State University

ABSTRACT
An architecture for visualizing information extracted from text
documents is proposed. In conformance with this architecture, a
toolkit, FemaRepViz, has been implemented to extract and visualize temporal, geospatial, and summarized information from FEMA
National Update Reports. Preliminary tests have shown satisfactory
accuracy for FEMARepViz. A central component of the architecture is an entity extractor that extracts named entities like person
names, location names, temporal references, etc. FEMARepViz
is based on FactXtractor, an entity-extractor that works on text
documents. The information extracted using FactXtractor is processed using GeoTagger, a geographical name disambiguation tool
based on a novel clustering-based disambiguation algorithm. To extract relationships among entities, we propose a machine-learning
based algorithm that uses a novel stripped dependency tree kernel. We illustrate and evaluate the usefulness of our system on the
FEMA National Situation Updates. Daily reports are fetched by
FEMARepViz from the FEMA website, segmented into coherent
sections and each section is classified into one of several known incident types. We use ConceptVista, Google Maps and Google Earth
to visualize the events extracted from the text reports and allow the
user to interactively filter the topics, locations, and time-periods of
interest to create a visual analytics toolkit that is useful for rapid
analysis of events reported in a large set of text documents.
Keywords: visual analytics, geo-temporal visualization, text processing, knowledge discovery, geospatial analytics
Index Terms: H.4.2 [INFORMATION SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS]: Types of Systems Decision support;
1 INTRODUCTION
Successful crisis management requires rapid response. Unfortunately, first responders are overloaded with vast amounts of information that needs to be processed in a very short amount of time.
Extracting required information totally automatically with high accuracy is not feasible (at least with today's technology). Therefore,
semi-automatic methods are essential. Human beings can understand and analyze data more effectively if the data is presented in
a visual mode. Ideally, the analyst or end-user should be presented
with the automatically extracted information and the tool should interact with the end-user to enable the end-user to explore summaries
of the data, correct extraction errors, select and examine articles of
interest in more detail, etc. Such visual analytics tools can help first
responders sift through large amounts of textual information fast in
order to select texts reporting events of choice such that they can
focus (drill down) into relevant articles and make decisions.
Spatial and temporal information are important attributes of data
that must be recognized and treated as first-class objects. Such in*e-mail: julianpan@psu.edu

te-mail:pmitra@ist.psu.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

formation forms a vital component of decision-making. Essentially,
end-users want to know what happened, when, and where. Firstresponders find such information crucial for decision making during emergency situations. For example, in 2004, an earthquake of
magnitude of 9.3 Richter occurred in the Indian Ocean. The earthquake resulted in a series of dreadful tsunamis and took more than
300,000 lives from south Asia to east Africa. Most residents of
the coastal areas did not have advance warning of the tsunami. A
decision support system that can quickly process scientific reports
and observations and generate an emergency alarm would be of immense value in such situations. Local television and radio stations
could then broadcast warnings in the impacted countries. Decision
makers in one country could promptly provide critical information
to the emergency response agencies in other countries. Thousands
of people could evacuate earlier and their lives could be saved.
Although, in this paper we do not provide an automated decision
support system, we outline the architecture of a visual analytics tool
that the end-user can use to make better decisions. The tool, FEMARepViz, extracts and visualizes information from FEMA National Situation Updates (and could also be extended to handle other
types of textual reports in the future) on a map and can show the
progression of events over time. The FEMA reports were primarily weather reports but also had items related to bombings, chemical
spills, etc. Our tool is especially useful when there are vast amounts
of textual data that is impossible to process totally manually.
FEMARepViz is a hybrid information extraction system that
extracts concept maps and spatial-temporal information from text
documents using both rule-based and machine-learning methods.
Daily reports are fetched from the FEMA website and automatically segmented into several incidents. Each incident then is classified into topics based on word frequency and tagged with timestamp and location names. The extracted information is stored in
a repository and can be presented with visualization applications
such as Google Earth. The system provides browsing and visualization of the incidents. Atop our extraction system, FactXtractor,
like FEMARepViz, many other applications can be built such as
emergency situation pattern analysis and real-time emergency monitoring.

1.1 FEMA National Situation Reports
The FEMA National Situation Updates contain information from a
variety of sources including federal agencies, state and local government, and the news media. The reports are designed to provide
in formation useful for emergency management planning and operational activities. Situation reports generally cover weather reports, earthquake activities, wildfire, and other incidents around the
United States. The reports include location names indicating where
the incidents happened. Sometimes persons or organizations involved in the incidents are also included in the reports. The richness of geographical information makes the FEMA National Situation Updates an excellent dataset for geo-temporal information
analysis.
1.2 Our Contributions
The key contributions of this paper are:

11

1. We design an information extraction system to automatically
process text documents and create concept maps and geotemporal visualization. We demonstrate the usefulness of our
system with the FEMA National Situation Updates.
2. We present a novel stripped dependency tree kernel for entity
relation extraction.
3. We present a heuristic algorithm for location name disambiguation. We use simple rules and propose a clustering algorithm to determine the coordinates of locations.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The overview of
system architecture is described in section 3 and technical details
are presented in section 4. In section 2 we discuss related work.
Finally we discuss future work in section 5 and conclude in section
6.

2 RELATED WORK
RSOE HAVARIA AlertMap[4] is a world-wide disaster information
system. The system reports real-time event updates for a variety of
incidents such as earthquake, active volcano, and tropical storms.
However, unlike our system, RSOE HAVARIA AlertMap collects
structured data from different data sources. Every event has been
classified by its data source (such as European flu data from EISS
and Volcano information from SWVRC) and come with detailed
information such as timestamp and location coordinates. Although
our system is focused on processing unstructured data, in the future, it can be enhanced to utilize information from structured data
sources for, say identifying event co-reference.
HEALTHmap[2] is a global disease information system that collects disparate data sources and provides a visualization of the current state of infectious diseases and their effect on human and animal health. The system gathers unstructured text from Google
News, ProMED-maill, and alerts from the World Health Organization2 and EuroSurveillance3. HEALTHmap processes text and
extracts disease names and the location names appearing in the text.
Locations are limited to countries and some major cities in certain
countries. HEALTHmap is a customized system for a specialized
domain of events, while our system is designed to process a broad
range of events.
Zelenko, et al., [18] proposed using tree kernels over shallow
parsing trees to extract person-affiliation and organization-location
relations. They created data samples by performing shallow parsing over sentences. Compared with deep parsing techniques, the
results from shallow parsing are more reliable [19]. The kernels
then compare similarity between parse trees by recursively matching nodes between two parse trees starting from the root nodes.
In their experiments, kernel-based approaches have better performance than feature-based approaches with several different learning algorithms.
Culotta and Sorensen [11] defined a slightly more general version of tree kernels than that proposed by Zelenko, et al., [18] with
a richer sentence representation. Their kernels are based on dependency trees instead of syntactic parse trees. Dependency trees include more information by considering syntactic relations between
words. The experimental results show the dependency tree kernels
have good precision but low recall on the ACE 2004 corpus. They
combined a bag-of-words kernel into the dependency tree kernel
to boost the performance. Harabagiu, et al., [13] combined dependency trees with shallow semantic parsing and reported average Fl-score of 78.41% on ACE 2004 corpus[17]. Greenwood
and Stevenson [12] further extended the dependency tree kernels
1

http://www.promedmail.org

2http://www.who.int/csr/alertresponse/en/

3http://www.eurosurveillance.org/
12

by using linked chain patterns and structural similarity measurement. Their approach can improve the performance over iterations;
nonetheless the maximum F-score is only 0.329 due to low recall.
Roth and Yih [15] described a linear programming (LP) framework to detect named entities and entity relations. Unlike most
NLP systems with pipelined architectures, their approach considers
outcomes of different but mutually dependent classifiers simultaneously. The learning algorithm is a variation of the Winnow algorithm. They annotated the TREC data set with named entities and
relations and then used the LP framework on it. Their results indicate that by optimizing the global interests instead of concentrating
on task-specific constraints and accumulating errors within pipeline
processes, the performance improved significantly.
Bunescu and Mooney [8] proposed a shortest path dependency
kernel which outperformed tree kernels on the ACE 2004 corpus.
Their approach treats the directed dependency graph as an undirected graph and finds the shortest path between two entities. Then
they compare the shortest path example with a Cartesian product
kernel to compute the number of common features on the path. The
key idea of the shortest dependency path is to consider only the information relevant to entity relations. The advantage of dependency
path kernels is that they do not consider the depth of entity nodes,
hence they yield better recall. However, their approach only considers the predicate-argument structures between words. Entities in
sentences such as "While in Paris, John never visited the Louvre."
may never be linked.
Our novel approach combines the advantages of dependency tree
kernels and that of an information elimination technique similar to
that proposed by Bunescu and Mooney [8]. We propose to use
stripped dependency trees. We show by empirical evaluation on
the same data set used in [ 15] that our approach has better precision
and improved recall than the dependency tree kernel proposed by
Culotta [11].

3 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
As shown in Figure 1, our system has the following major components:(a)Text Extraction and Processing Module, (b) Disambiguation Module, and (c) Visualization and User Interaction Module.
The text extraction and processing module processes a set of documents and extracts named entities (like person, place, and organization names). It also segments a text into different contiguous
segments having the same topic. The extraction module also detect
events. For the current application, segmenting the document itself
based on topics resulted in segregating the different events and we
did not have to perform complex temporally-based event detection.
The disambiguation module is responsible for disambiguating
named entities. For person names, the role of the disambiguation
module is to establish which names refer to the same person, e.g.,
"Mohandas Gandhi" and "M.K. Gandhi", or if the same name actually refers to different people, e.g., two occurrences of "James
Smith" may refer to different people in two different contexts. This
module is also responsible for coreference resolution. The disambiguation module processes geographical named entities and using
the information available about the contexts in which they occur,
disambiguates the geographical named entity to an exact location.
For example, it would generate an exact latitude and longitude for
a reference to the town "Springfield" using the context information
to derive which of the several "Springfield"'s in the U.S.A. (or beyond) it is.
The visualization module presents the information extracted
from the text on a map for a particular time-point (or time-period).
The user can interact with this module to filter the data being displayed based on topics, time periods, geographical locations, or
people of interest. The user can provide feedback to correct incorrect items shown on the map, e.g., to move a displayed event
from one location to another. The feedback provided by the user

Tet
Documents

Statiti tse

....-

X

Processing
Module
Entity

Extration

Users

ents

-.

liarr
Dinal
FBrowsi ngX

.4

Relation
EXttaCtiOti

Get

Tnpitbased

Dmar

Ti _s

?edback.

T-

0 on

Figure 1: Overviewxz of system architecture
and the user's activities can be logged for future improvement of
the extraction from text.
To provide the functionality of the three modules indicated
above our system utilizes three main components: FactXtractor
GeoTagger, and FEMARepViz. Every component is designed as a
standalone web service to ensure system flexibility and interoperability.

3.1

t X

X .:t
s 84P z

Information Extraction

FactXtractor is an information extraction web service for Named
Entity Recognition (NER) and Entity Relation Extraction (RE).
FactXtractor processes text documents using an open source text
processing platform (GATE[l]) and identifies entity relations using
Stripped Dependency Tree kernels. Figure 2 shows the major steps
of the processing flow. The input of FactXtractor is a document
or a set of documents in plain text format. First, the text is processed by a shallow parser to get parts of speech (PoS) tags. In addition it identifies other linguistics features such as noun chunks and
verb groups. In the second step, we use the Named Entity Tagger
provided by GATE to extract named entities. Next, a deep parser
processes the text to construct dependency trees. Syntactic relationships (subject-verb-object) can be easily extracted using dependency trees. FactXtractor extracts relationships using the Stripped
Dependency Tree Kernels. The output of FactXtractor is a graph of
the extracted entities and their relationships formatted in OWL [7]
(see Figure 7). This extracted graph can be visualized with ConceptVista4. We will discuss the methods used in FactXtractor in
section 4.

3.2 Geographical Name Disambiguation
GeoTagger is a geocoding Web service. GeoTagger maps a location name that appears in text to its correct co-ordinates on a
map GeoTagger uses the U S Geological Survey (USGS) Geographic Names Information System (GNIS)5 for U S locations
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) GEOnet Names
Server (GNS)T for locations outside U.S., and Google Map for
global locations . We use Google Map as a secondary reference
because GNIS and GEOnet contain many locations which are only
used in local For example State College MS is listed in GNIS
but is not listed in Google Map. If a location is listed in GNIS or
GEOnet but not in Google Map, we do not consider it as a candidate

4available
at
5

httt Hwww geovista psu.edo/Con eptVISTA
http-/Hgeonames.usgs.gov/pls/gnispublic/

6http:/Hearth-info.nga.mil/gns/html/index.html

Figure 2: Text Processing Flow

for assigning location names. We will discuss the details in section
4.
FEMARepViz is a visualization generation Web service for the
FEMA Situation Reports. FEMARepViz processes situation reports using FactXtractor and GeoTagger. Processed reports are
stored in a repository and can be retrieved by a Web interface. The
output is a KML document that provides dynamic updates and interactive visualization. Figure 3 illustrates the information processing
flow and connections between the web services.

4 METHODS
4.1 Named Entity Recognition
We use GATE[ 1] to extract named entities GATE is distributed
with an Information Extraction component set called ANNIE ANNIE contains a rule-based engine. ANNIE extracts nauned entities
using gazetteers and language features like Part of Speech etc The
named entities we extracted include person, location, organization,
and time. Table 1 shows the performance evaluation of the GATE
named entity extraction module on the CoNLL 2004 corpus.

4.2 Entity Relation Extraction
We use an approach applying kernel methods on dependency trees
for relation extraction. Kernel methods are widely used in a variety
of machine learning problems with many popular algorithms such
as Support Vector Machines[ 10] (SVM) and Perceptron[6].

13

VVeb} Interface

Figure 3: Information processing workflow

Table 1: Evaluation of the GATE named entity extraction module
PER LOC ORG
Precision 0.89 0.81
0.65
Recall
0.74 0.79
0.69

F1

0.8

0.8

0.66

A dependency tree represents of a parsed sentence and shows
the relations between words [11]. A node in a dependency tree is
the corresponding word or words in the original sentence. The dependence between words could be verb-subject, verb-object, verbadjective, etc. First we process each sentence by NLP tools to obtain the dependency information, named entities and word features
such as PoS tags. We then generate a dependency tree for every
pair of named entities in a sentence. A similarity score between
two trees can be computed recursively from the roots of the trees
(see [11] for details).
One important observation of dependency trees is that if a node
does not contain a descendant with a relation argument in its subtree, the node usually will not be involved in the relationship between entities. For example, in Figure 5, removing the node "a"
from both trees will not change the fact that the two trees are similar to each other.
Based on this observation, we define the concept of stripped dependency tree (SDT) as follows: an SDT is a subtree of a dependency tree. Every node in an SDT has at least one descendant node
that is a relation argument of a relation. We only consider binary
relations in this paper. Hence, each relation has two relation arguments. For example, in a relation (Pittsburgh, located in, Pennsylvania), Pittsburgh and Pennsylvania are the relation arguments.
Nodes are removed if they do not have a descendant with relation
argument. Stripping a dependency tree can be done in 0(n) with a
depth first search (DFS), where n is the number of nodes in the dependency tree. Because we have to perform a DFS to find the min-

14

.Z.d
Nuty
adi Ilelse

Seaie

tboiight

fbuil

34ile -"- .S..
br.

near

ni

Figure 5: Dependency trees for "John bought a house near Seattle"
and "Mary quickly found a car in Chicago".

imum subtree that contains the specified entities, adding the node
elimination will not increase the computational complexity. Note
that there will be no non-matching nodes in the SDT. Hence, there
is no difference between the contiguous tree kernel and the sparse
tree kernel for SDT.
The advantages of SDTs are as follows:
1. The SDT is computationally efficient. We can use the continuous tree kernel algorithm to compute the result. An SDT
usually has fewer nodes than the original dependency tree.
2. The matching process for SDTs will not be interrupted by ir-

Figure 4: Processed FEMA National Situation Updates from Feb 3, 2007 to Feb 6, 2007.

relevant nodes. SDTs should give better results on similarity
measurement for entity relationships.
Some important information may be discarded when a dependency tree is converted to an SDT. For example, a sentence "John
likes Mary." should not be matched with "John doesn't like Mary.".
To handle this, and to improve the performance of the algorithm,
we have made some enhancements; we describe them below.
We use MINIPAR to parse each sentence; we then generate a
dependency tree for the sentence using output of MINIPAR. MINIPAR can achieve about 88% in precision and 80% in recall for determining dependency relationships7. By linking each word with
its head word of the MINIPAR output, dependency trees can be
created for all the sentences.

Table 3: List of feature assigned to each tree node.

Feature
word
POS
General POS
Entity type
Relation argument
WordNet hypernym
WordNet synonym
Orthography
Chunk tag
Word root
Verb voice
Verb negation

Example
John
NN
N
Person

arg,

4274300
4274300
upperlnitial
NP
john
active
yes

Table 2: Annotated relations in the training corpus.

Relations
loc, locatedin, loc
per, work for, org
org, orgBasedin, loc
per, live in, loc
per, kill, per

Example
(Seattle, locatedin, Washington)
(Steve Jobs, work for, Apple)
(Microsoft, orgBased in, Redmond)
(Bush, live in, D.C.)
(Oswald, kill, JFK)

For each node, we assign a set of features generated by GATE.
We used the features used by Culotta and Sorensen [11]. To improve the performance, we added some additional features. They
are orthography, word root, verb voice, verb negation, and synonyms obtained from WordNet. Table 3 lists all the features that
we used in our experiments. Note that we represent WordNet hypemym and synonym set by their set-id. WordNet will give a list of
hypernym sets ordered by estimated frequency and likewise for the
synonym sets. We use both hypernym and synonym sets to capture
the semantics of words.
We have implemented the tree kernel algorithms in Java and used
it in an SVM. We augment the LibSVM[9] implementation to use

7http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/ lindek/minipar.htm

the tree kernels. We use the CoNLL 04 corpus8 to evaluate the
performance of tree kernels. The corpus consists of articles from
several different sources such as WSJ and AP. There are 5925 sentences in the corpus. Among those sentences, 5336 named entities
and 2040 binary relations are manually annotated. The annotated
named entities include 1685 persons, 1968 locations, 978 organizations and 705 others. The relations between those named entities
include 406 locatedin, 394 work for, 451 orgBasedin, 521 livein,
and 268 kill. Table 2 shows examples for each relation. Since our
extractor already captured the Subject-Verb-Object structure using
dependency trees, we only trained the SVM for the first four relations.
We compared the tree-kernels results with the best results published in [15] obtained using a linear programming algorithm. The
F1 is computed by considering both precision and recall. Precision
is the ratio of the number of correctly predicted positive answers to
the number of total predicted positive answers. Recall is the ratio
of the number of correctly predicted positive answers to the number

8available at ttp:H1l2r.cs.uiuc.edu/-cogcomp/Data/ER/conllO4.corp
15

Figure 6: A fragment of the FEMA National Situation Updates with
entities highlighted

of positively annotated relations. We use the following equation to
compute the F1 score.
F1

2 * Prec. * Rec.
Prec. + Rec.

Table 4 shows the performance comparison between F1 scores
for both LP and SVM with tree kernels using 5-fold crossvalidation. The results indicate that tree kernel approaches outperform the linear programming approach for all relations tagged
in the testing corpus. The tree kernel with SDT further improved
the original dependency tree kernel described in [ 1]. As shown in
4, combining contiguous tree kernel with SDT did not improve the
precision very much. The recall of the tree kernel with SDT is 3%
to 8% better than the original dependency tree kernel. By reducing noise introduced by unnecessary nodes in dependency trees, the
tree kernel performed better prediction for identifying relations between entities. We also experimented with different values for the
decay factor A. Our observations are in line with those observed
by Culotta and Sorensen [11]. The performance did not vary much
with different A values.

4.3 Geo-Coding
Grounding a location name with a correct coordinate is challenging. Essentially, we want to disambiguate places with the same
name such as "Springfield" to the unambiguous "Springfield, IL"
and "Springfield, PA". If additional information is not available, the
geo-coding for "Springfield" becomes arbitrary. In our system, we
have implemented a dedicated component called GeoTagger that is
used for geo-coding tasks.
GeoTagger takes a short text as input then determines a geographical scope for the text. The geographical scope of a text segment is determined based on the locations with higher certainty. We

16

define geographical scope in four levels: World, Continent, Country, and Province. For each text segment, the largest geographical
scope will be used to select candidate coordinates. For example, if
"United States", "Pennsylvania" and "Georgia" are extracted from
a text segment, then the geographical scope is determined at the
"Country" level. Determining the geographical scope for a text can
eliminate unlikely candidate locations. For example, if the highest geographical scope is "Country" and two countries, the "United
States" and "Germany" have been extracted from the text, then only
locations within these two countries will be considered in the disambiguation algorithm.
Even within a geographical scope, each location name could
have several candidate locations. We perform geo-spatial disambiguation based on the following intuition: Location names that
occur close together in the same document segment refer to places
that are geographically close. For each location name, GeoTagger obtains the latitude-longitude of all possible places with the
same location name, provided the place is within the geographical scope. GeoTagger then clusters locations such that each cluster
contains only one occurrence of a location with a particular location name. That is, two Springfields cannot belong to one cluster,
because the objective of clustering is to separate the possible locations and choose the location that is closest to the other (possibly
non-ambiguous) location names.
The clustering algorithm works as follows. For each location
name n in a set of location names N, we construct a list of latitudelongitudes of places with the name n. GeoTagger uses the k-means
clustering algorithm with a parameter k to control the maximum
number of clusters. The distance between two points is computed
using the Euclidean distance between their coordinates. The result
of the k-means algorithm is a one-to-one mapping between location
names and their coordinates. The algorithm is listed in Algorithm
1. GeoTagger increments the value of k starting from k 2 until
clusters are obtained that cover all location names in the set N such
that no cluster contains two locations with the same name.

Algorithm 1: Algorithm for location selection
Input Geographical scope GS, Set of location names N,
Maximum number of clusters K, threshold w
Output: Map of coordinations M
begin
M <- 4) for each n C N do
L Coorsn <- coordinates within GS match n
for k = 1 to K do
Arbitrarily select coorO E Coorsn -* M(n)

Coorsn

Coorsn -cooro}

Dk = k-means(k,M)
for each n E N do
for each coori C Coorsn do
if Replacing M(n) by coori reduce Dk then
LM(n) <- coori

end

if Dk-Dk- < L) then
L break
return M

Despite the simplicity of our geographical names disambiguation algorithm, the algorithm works reasonably well on the situation reports. However, geographical names that refer to large areas
such as "Great Plains" or " The Mississippi River" may create difficulty since we only consider point-to-point distances. Extension
of GeoTagger to handle non-point locations is left as future work.

Table 4: Comparison of relations classification results demonstrating improvement of our tree kernel + SDT method over the existing LP
method[1 5] for the CoNLL 04 corpus.

Relations

located in
work for
orgBased in
live in

Prec.
54.5
69.2
76.7
60.7

LP
Rec.
64.0
50.5
50.3
57.0

F1
58.9
58.4
60.7
58.8

Prec.
78.6
77.7
67.2
74.0

tree kernel
F1
Rec.
58.4 67.0
61.2 68.5
55.6 60.8
57.1 64.4

tree kernel + SDT
F1
Prec. Rec.
79.7 61.5 69.4
76.3 65.1 70.2
71.3 60.1 65.2
79.6 58.9 67.7

I-ype- .i

Zilme

Figure 7: The Concept map generated from the segment of the FEMA National Situation Updates shown in Figure 6

4.4 Document Segmentation and Topic Classification
We use the n-gram language model described in [14] for topic classification. The classification model estimates the maximum likelihood for a sequence of words by computing conditional probability
of previous n -1 words. A category then can be decided by picking c* C C = tcl
.ci.. , CC } that has the largest posterior probability
given the text with the following equation.
c

argmax{Pr(cjD)}
ceC

where D is the text segment. We use the DynamicLMClassifier
implementation in LingPipe[3]. Text segments will be classified
into one of nine categories that commonly appear in situation reports. The categories include disease, noticeable, snow, wildfire,
earthquake, rain, thunderstorm, winter storm, and others. The noticeable category includes some uncommon incidents deserving of
notice such as tornadoes, power plane exploding, and chemical
leakage. 20 text segments are manually selected in each category
as training corpus. Our preliminary evaluation indicates the topic
classification model could achieve 93% accuracy.
For text documents where the topics are not known or manually
labeled training examples are not available, a clustering based topic
detection [5] and text segmentation algorithm can be employed

[16].

4.5 Geo-temporal Visualization
We provide the following visualization capabilities with FEMARepViz.
First, the extracted graph between named entities that is generated as an OWL [7] file can be displayed with ConceptVista (Figure
7). In the named entity graph, entities are color-coded for their entity type. Links between entities indicate relations among them.
The ConceptVista visualization is useful for users to grasp the key

concepts (people/organization/location) within the reports without
reading them.
Second, FEMARepViz visualizes the situation reports using
Google Earth. From each report, events are detected using the segmentation algorithm mentioned above and geo-coded. Each event is
represented using an icon that shows the type of event that occurred
(using one icon for each of the known categories listed above). Geocoded incidents will be generated in Google Earth KML format and
upload to Google Earth by a Network Link. If a particular event occurred in multiple places, the icon for that event is shown at all the
locations on Google Earth. By using a right-click of the mouse, an
user can see a summary of the event associated with an icon on a
translucent pane that is hidden once the next icon is clicked.
Each situation report has a date associated with it. FEMARepViz
extracts the first date entity in each report and takes it to be the date
the report was published. A timestamp is added to each incident
to indicate the temporal relationship between incidents. Our user
interface has a time-slide wedge using which an user can change
the timeline and examine the incidents that happened during the
time period around the world (Figure 8).
Third, Google Earth is used to display the extracted information
similarly to Google Map. However, in this version, the user can use
a frame at the left-hand side to select topics, people, location and
time that is of interest. This allows the user to filter out the entire set
of events and display only a set of events that are of interest to the
user. Moreover, Google Earth allows users to play the dated events
as an animation. The feature is useful for visualizing a sequence of
events such as spreading of a wildfire or movement of a hurricane
over different locations.

5 FUTURE WORK
In the future, we plan to build statistical analysis modules on top
of our information extraction system. Currently, two types of fore-

17

Homeland Security Program, under the auspices of the Northeast
Regional Visualization and Analytics Center (NEVAC). NVAC is
operated by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), a
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory.

REFERENCES
[1] GATE: General architecture for text engineering.
http://gate.ac.uk.
[2] HEALTHmap. http://www.healthmap.org/.
[3] LingPipe. http://www.alias-i.comnlingpipe/.
[4] RSOE HAVARIA AlertMap.

http://hisz.rsoe.hu/alertmap/woalert.php?lang=eng.

Figure 8: Geo-temporal visualization with Google Earth from February 4th 2007 to February 6th 2007.

casting modules are under development.
Periodic Incidents Forecasting: Periodic incidents can be predicted with time series analysis such as moving average or exponential smoothing. Incidents periodically appear in situation reports such as weather conditions are usually with seasonal factors.
Hence, seasonal adjustment is necessary for forecasting. Using
time series analysis we can predict the likelihood for periodic incidents in a region.
Correlated Incidents Forecasting: Some incidents may occur
conditionally after other incidents. For example, a flood may happen in some region after heavy rain. Tornadoes may be caused by
unusual heat or thunderstorms. Such correlation can be found in
historical reports and used to forecast future incidents.
Although our relation extraction and geographical names disambiguation algorithms work reasonably well on the testing corpus
and the situation reports, we will conduct more experiments to justify the significance of the performance improvement.
Moreover, we will add more data sources with varying reliability
and types of events including ProMED Mail, Global Disaster Alert
and Coordination System, news media, and Internet blogs.

6 CONCLUSION
We present an architecture and an implementation of a system that
can be used to automatically extract information from vast amounts
of textual data and present the extracted information visually to
end-users. We use FEMA National Situation Updates as our test
bed to demonstrate the usefulness of our system. Our system, FEMARepViz utilizes an entity-relationship extractor, FactXtractor,
to extract named entities and links entities with syntactic and semantic relations. Named entity graphs can be created to visualize
entity relations. Furthermore, we use GeoTagger to resolve geographical ambiguity and create geo-temporal visualizations with
FEMARepViz and Google Earth.
Since there is no computational approach that can achieve
human-level accuracy for complex information extraction tasks, visualization could be a solution to bridge the gap between fully automated extraction and search systems and manual data processing.
We believe that our system can benefit users who have needs to analyze massive geo-temporal information in an efficient manner. We
conjecture that our system architecture can form the basis for future
visual analytics systems over text data, especially for information
with important geo-spatial and temporal attributes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed with partial support from the National
Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC), a U.S. Department of

18

[5] On-line new event detection and tracking. ACM Press, 1998.
[6] A. Aizerman, E. M. Braverman, and L. I. Rozoner. Theoretical foundations of the potential function method in pattern recognition learning. Automation and Remote Control, 25:821 -837, 1964.
[7] S. Bechhofer, F. van Harmelen, J. Hendler, I. Horrocks, D. McGuinness, P. Patel-Schneider, and L. Stein. Owl web ontology language
reference. Technical report, W3C.
[8] R. C. Bunescu and R. J. Mooney. A shortest path dependency kernel
for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 724-731, October 2005.
[9] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. LIBSVM: a library for support vector
machines, 2001. Software available at
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm.
[10] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine Learning,
20(3):273-297, 1995.
[11] A. Culotta and J. Sorensen. Dependency tree kernels for relation extraction. In ACL, 2004.
[12] M. A. Greenwood and M. Stevenson. Improving semi-supervised acquisition of relation extraction patterns. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Information Extraction Beyond The Document, pages 29-35,
Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[13] S. M. Harabagiu, C. A. Bejan, and P. Morarescu. Shallow semantics
for relation extraction. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI '05), pages 10611066, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 2005.
[14] F. Peng, D. Schuurmans, and S. Wang. Language and task independent text categorization with simple language models. In NAACL '03:
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human Language
Technology, pages 110- 117, Morristown, NJ, USA, 2003. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[15] D. Roth and W.-T. Yih. A linear programming formulation for global
inference in natural language tasks. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2004,
2004.
[16] B. Sun, P. Mitra, L. C. Giles, J. Yen, and H. Zha. Topic segmentation with shared topic detection and alignment of multiple documents. In SIGIR '07: Proceedings of the 30th annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, pages 199-206, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM Press.
[17] A. M. ,et al. Ace 2004 multilingual training corpus. Linguistic Data
Consortium, Philadelphia, 2005.
[18] D. Zelenko, C. Aone, and A. Richardella. Kernel methods for relation extraction. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:1083-1106,
2003.
[19] S. Zhao and R. Grishman. Extracting relations with integrated information using kernel methods. In ACL '05: Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
419-426, Morristown, NJ, USA, 2005. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

