Stories in GeoTime
Ryan Eccles1

Thomas Kapler2

Robert Harper3

William Wright4

Oculus Info Inc

ABSTRACT
A story is a powerful abstraction used by intelligence analysts to
conceptualize threats and understand patterns as part of the
analytical process. This paper demonstrates a system that detects
geo-temporal patterns and integrates story narration to increase
analytic sense-making cohesion in GeoTime. The GeoTime geotemporal event visualization tool was augmented with a story
system that uses narratives, hypertext linked visualizations, visual
annotations, and pattern detection to create an environment for
analytic exploration and communication, thereby assisting the
analyst in identifying, extracting, arranging and presenting stories
within the data The story system lets analysts operate at the story
level with higher-level abstractions of data, such as behaviors and
events, while staying connected to the evidence. The story system was developed and evaluated in collaboration with analysts.
CR Categories:
H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human
Information Processing – Visual Analytics; H.5.2 [Information
Interfaces & Presentations]: User Interfaces – Graphical User
Interfaces (GUI);
Keywords: human information interaction, visual analytics,
sense-making, narrative, pattern detection, story making, story
telling
1

INTRODUCTION

Narrative theory [1] suggests that people are essentially
storytellers and have an implicit ability to evaluate a story for
consistency, detail, and structure. From an analyst perspective, a
story offers a common form of communication for investigating
the feasibility of a connected collection of characters and their
motives. For these reasons a story narrative presents a potent way
of capturing the analysts’ insights that can promote sharing of
observations and understanding of complex phenomenon. Beyond
communication, a story allows people to build spaces in which to
think, act, and talk in a framework [5]. In this sense a story serves
as an internal communication tool – a method of organizing the
daily observations into meaningful knowledge. It is the ability to
pull information together into a coherent story that guides the
organization of observations into meaningful structures and
patterns. To an intelligence analyst, a story acts as an artifact of
tacit and gained knowledge applied to raw observed data.
The prototype GeoTime Stories system introduces three sets of
features intended to allow analysis at a higher level of abstraction
than traditional visualization tools. The first is a space-time
pattern finding system that relieves the analyst from the need to
search for some common behaviors and relationships among
events and moving entities. Found patterns are passed to an
annotation system that visually highlights the pattern events with

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

an expressive graphic. The annotation system also tags the
internal data model with information about the annotation. Finally
a specialized text editing panel is provided allows the analysts to
author narratives and explanations (reports) containing links to
bookmarked views of events in time and space. The text system
also provides a means to categorize content to support
collaboration or multiple story threads. This system was
developed following a cognitive task analysis of analysts.
Reviews with analysts suggest that this system could increase the
descriptive capability and clarity of their insights and reports. An
example of an analytic story using GeoTime visualization was
published [18] prior to completion of the capabilities described
here. It serves as one example of the type of story that GeoTime
Stories is intended to support.
2

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

A story or narrative is essentially a means of communicating a
sequence of events related to the experience of characters.
Plowman [13] clarifies that although both terms narrative and
story are typically seen as synonymous, a narrative specifically
refers to the macro-structure of a document whereas a story refers
to both structure and content. In Plowman, the narrative macrostructure was considered more problematic and more worthy of
investigation than supporting content exploration. In intelligence
analysis, however, the content of a story is also of particular
importance and they both need to be equally addressed.
Classically, Aristotle, in Poetics, describes the objects of a
tragedy (or story) as plot, character and thought. Thought is
described as the processes of reasoning that lead characters to
behave as they do. Plots are “arrangements of incidents” and
tragedies are most importantly the representation of actions, not of
characters. However, plots do more than organize events into a
coherent structure. The authors of tragedies, or poets, grasp and
represent the internal logic in a story that underlies the necessity
of the outcome of the events. Laurel [11] states that a story offers
a context to understand and communicate activities and plots
played by characters or actors. Context helps an audience apply
their tacit knowledge in order to better comprehend the point
being communicated by the author. When applied to analysis, a
story can therefore be a very useful medium for clearly
communicating a situation and related information.
Various approaches to connect information visualization with
the communicative power of story-telling have been investigated,
each with advantages and drawbacks in the context of its usage by
intelligence analysts. A common technique is to use hypertext
links to multimedia [14] or additional textual [8][15] content. The
LifeLines project allowed for the incorporation of multimedia and
interactions for creation and playback of connected temporal data
[12], using interactively linked 2-D displays. The MyLifeBits
system incorporates a lifetime’s worth of media to tell a story [3].
In Vaucelle [14], video content can be retrieved and associated
with text in a system called a Textable Movie. This paradigm

19

allows the author to assemble pre-recorded video clips together to
form a movie based on the text content. The focus of the Textable
Movie system is to add narrative structure to existing content,
rather than address both content and structure. In systems such as
the Textable Movie, linked content is immutable and limited in its
context. The system is limited in that links are intended to be
viewed but not manipulated and investigated further.
Zellweger [15] presented another interesting visualization
technique for the hyperlink story through the Fluid Reader. It has
been observed that stories should be more or less linear with
minimal context switches to connected information [2]; an
apparent contradiction for hyperlinked documents. To address this
issue, Fluid Text includes links that expand in place to allow the
text to still be read linearly. This is advantageous for providing
footnotes and additional context on demand. The concept of a
dynamic content story that can be read linearly is very interesting;
however it is not amenable to an important requirement for some
analytical techniques: the ability to compare and contrast different
versions of stories that share some key aspects. Analysis of
Competing Hypotheses is a common analytical method in which
multiple possible explanations for an observation are explored. In
order to support multiple story threads and collaborative analysis,
the system should be able to remove, mix, and categorize content
across the entire document. For example, if different characters
tell parts of a story, hiding one character’s contribution could
significantly change its meaning. This is more like a filter on the
story content, rather than a link to other content.
A system that explores collaborative authoring mixed with
annotation on visualization is Sense.us [16]. Although GeoTime
uses a similar approach, Senus.us uses a blog-type discussion
workflow as a textual foundation, whereas GeoTime is designed
for authoring and presenting a single coherent story, which is
more suited to the types of reports generated by analysts. In
addition, the annotations made by sense.us are implemented as
vector graphics that are overlaid above a visualization, whereas in
GeoTime, annotations are semantically connected to the
underlying data and become part of the time-space data itself.
This makes it possible to trace an information path from a
sentence in a story to the actual event data that it refers to. Manyeyes.com [17] offers a similar discussion blog-based system.
However, instead of providing graphical annotation tools, it
allows users to highlight data points in a linked view. This method
does allow specific data to be semantically linked to a comment,
but does not provide for graphical expressiveness.
Finally, it has been suggested that visualization itself can be
augmented using animation, voice narration, and visual
annotations to tell a story about analysis [4].
2.1

GeoTime – Unified Temporal and Geospatial
Analysis

The Stories system is built on the GeoTime time-space
visualization framework, which is designed to improve the
perception and understanding of entity movements, events,
relationships and interactions over time within a geospatial
context [9][10]. GeoTime supports representations for the base
elements of a story: events, people, objects, places and
relationships. Its ability to display these elements in time and
space make it a suitable platform on which to build
representations and interactions with stories. GeoTime represents
events within an X, Y, T coordinate space in which the X and Y

20

plane represents geographic space, and the Z axis represents
temporal space.
Analyzing observations over time and geography is a common
task but typically requires multiple, separate tools. The objective
of GeoTime is to enable the analysis of information
connectedness over time and geography within a single, highly
interactive 3D view as shown in Figure 1. Events are animated in
time through the 3D space as the slider bar is moved. A previous
evaluation of GeoTime found that its unified geo-temporal
representation increased analysts’ understanding of entity
relationships and behaviors [10]. GeoTime allows the perception
of who and what in the where and when.

Figure 1. GeoTime for analysis of events in time and space.

3

DESIGN AND CONTEXT

The objective is to enable analysts to perform analysis at a higher
level of abstraction than currently possible. Rather than working
with raw or atomic data, the analyst should be able to work and
think in terms of behaviors, events and plots such that it leads to
comprehension,
discovery,
hypothesis
generation
and
communication. In preparation for the GeoTime Stories
investigations, a brief cognitive task analysis (CTA) study was
completed including structured interviews, examination of work
place artifacts and a review of the literature [6][7]. From the
structured interviews, conducted with fourteen analysts, it was
clear that the idea of “story” is broadly applicable to analysis.
Deciding which dots to connect and how, what the context is,
what the alternatives and the implications are, how one story leads
to an-other, and how to share observations and collaborating is a
daily and critical task. The following are illustrative interview
excerpts:
“Coherence and narrative are principles that guide the
organization of observations into meaningful structures and
patterns … Plots are formed of dominant concepts or leading
ideas that the analyst uses to postulate patterns of relationships
among the data ... a story must form a logical and coherent whole
and be internally consistent as well as consistent with the
evidence.”
“It’s good to put all the factoids together. See how they relate
to hypotheses. Trajectories of factoids over time can tell a story.”
“A hypothesis is an assertion. An elaborate hypothesis, a story.”

“Once you have the data observations, and can see the links, in
time and geography, you need to go to generation of hypotheses.
[You need] to think of new possibilities and new lines of inquiry.”

Figure 3. A concept sketch of an annotated GeoTime scene
representing the events of a fictional story.

Figure 2. The story concept spectrum as conceived for Stories
development.

A theme emerged that suggests incremental hypothesis
generation and the need to tie a story back to evidence was
particularly important. A simple model of story emerged, as
shown in Figure 2, that helped to conceptualize the relationship
between story concepts and the analytical workflow. The model
defines a spectrum that ranges from low level facts and details to
higher-level organizational structures, such as character and
intent. Frequently used analytical concepts were located within
this space. There are two workflows represented in this model,
roughly described as bottom-up and top-down. Visualization and
pattern detection within raw data serve as bottom-up methods for
building information into higher level concepts. In contrast, a topdown workflow occurs when analysts apply their tacit knowledge
to guide the search for information and patterns in the raw data
from experience. The role of visualization in this model is to
spark rapid recognition of those internalized stories by expressing
patterns of activity in an easily digestible form. Bridging between
experience and raw information is the basic activity of analysis. It
enables prediction by mapping the known facts onto the familiar
plotlines that an analyst has previously seen. We seek to facilitate
this process in GeoTime.
Using the story spectrum model, two different approaches were
defined to close the gap between the analytic stories and data
visualization. The first was to help the analyst recognize patterns
by creating higher-level visual pattern representations. This
should stimulate faster recognition of tacit stories in the mind of
an analyst. An early concept sketch, shown in Figure 3, explored
the use of expressive annotation to summarize complex, raw data
for rapid recognition by the analyst. The second approach was to
work from the other end of the story spectrum to support the
analysts’ application of tacit knowledge and organizational
structures. The system should enable analysts to capture thoughts,
and then allow them to bridge from thoughts to patterns and all
the way to raw evidence.
The assembly and organization of story elements is also
important. A story provides a unique representation of events that
are not necessarily linear. In timeline visualizations, events are
ordered chronologically. In a story, however, events can be
arranged in an order relevant to the topic. The author of a story
can move the reader’s attention forward and backward in time to
provide context. We refer to this important concept of sequencing
the presentation of information as chronotopic time.

The three key workflow objectives for the prototype were to:
• Integrate new and existing pattern matching tools to drive
annotated expressive visualizations. This should assist the
process of story discovery.
• In a narrative text, provide links to supporting visualizations
of events in time and space that invoke a complete analysis
context and allow jumping off points for further analysis.
This assists with story authoring and story telling.
• Support authoring and comparison of multiple versions of
story sub-components and elements. This helps make
visible alternative sequences, explanations and hypotheses.
4

SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION

The GeoTime Stories prototype includes three main components:
Annotated pattern detection, narrative text authoring, and story
threading. Each of these is designed to provide particular
analytical capabilities and is discussed individually.
4.1

Pattern Detection and Expressive Annotation

A common problem for analysts is that they must wade through
large volumes of low-level data and painstakingly extract
behaviors and patterns in order to understand a situation. This
process reduces both the amount of data that can be analyzed and
the number of observations that can be discovered. To address
this, the stories system provides functions for detection of simple
patterns in movement activity, including discovery of possible
meetings, speed of movement, percentage of time spent at unique
locations, and identifying gaps in observations. The results of
these functions are then fed into the annotation system in order to
reduce the cognitive effort required to recognize these low-level
incidents in the data. This allows the analyst to work at a higher
level of abstraction, thereby stimulating faster recognition of
larger behaviors or plots [19].
It was not our focus to develop new pattern discovery
functions; rather, it was our intent to understand how they could
be leveraged into the analytic workflow for maximum benefit.
Although pattern detection is a separate area of research of great
complexity, the pattern functions we implemented were useful in
testing and refining interaction between pattern detection,
visualization, and a story. The pattern system uses a plug-in
architecture so that additional external pattern detection functions
can be integrated.

21

GeoTime makes use of visual annotations to highlight the
results of pattern searches within the visualization display.
Annotations are graphic cues that can be added to a space-time
scene in order to mark and describe important events in a given
view. An individual pattern function applies specific annotations
to the data points identified with an instance of a pattern. For
example, in Figure 4, the movement speed pattern function
annotates a geo-temporal path with a visual indicator of velocity.
It can also annotate this with icons that express speed by
indicating a mode of transportation such as moving by foot, car,
or aircraft as shown in Figure 5.

interactions such as mouseovers and menus on annotation
graphics themselves. One possible downside is that annotation
options are limited and not as simple as 2D sketch interfaces.

Figure 6. The user annotation menu with five annotation styles.

Figure 4. Annotated snapshot result of the velocity annotation
function. Path of movement is annotated with indicator of speed;
red is fast and white is slow.

Annotations are implemented such that their display is tied to a
saved “snapshot”, which is an embedded link in the text of the
story window. The story window is the authoring environment
where the visualization of events in space and time, including
annotations, are meaningfully connected to a story.
4.2

Story Window

The story window, as shown in Figure 7 is the focus of storyauthoring functionality in GeoTime. It enables the analyst to
review pattern search results, author and present stories about
events in time and space, capture moments of insight, and
collaborate with other analysts.

Figure 5. Annotation of movement speed using icons (cars and
walking people) to describe possible mode of transport.

Annotations may also be manually applied to events by an
analyst to highlight events and direct the attention of the story
“reader”. The analyst selects events in the scene and then chooses
from a palette of annotations, including curves, arrows, callouts,
outlines and enlargement, shown in Figure 6.
GeoTime annotations are unique in that they are implemented
as data objects referenced to the actual event data, rather than as a
separate graphical overlay. This approach is required due to the
dynamic nature of the GeoTime 3D display. In order to remain
attached to the events they reference, annotations need to be rerendered each time the scene updates in response to user
interactions. Although this adds complexity to the software, a
significant benefit to this approach is that annotations retain a
semantic connection to their events and patterns. It also allows for
richer graphical and data-specific expressions, such as
enlargement or re-coloring of events, and even supports

22

A story document is comprised of a title and one or more text
sections. Each text section can be any length or number of
paragraphs and has an optional title bar. Story templates are
outlines that can be selected when a new document is created. For
example, a template may contain empty sections titled
“Introduction”, “Body”, and “Conclusion”, or may include
detailed instructions for how to do certain types of analysis. Story
templates are meant to jumpstart analysis or provide instruction to
new users about tools and techniques. The content of the
templates is configurable. GeoTime currently contains very
simple templates as examples.
The story window is designed to address a top-down storybased workflow by allowing the analyst to capture their insights,
thoughts, explanations, and conclusions about events visualized in
GeoTime. The tool provides the analyst with a familiar text editor
interface for assembling a story but adds the capability to embed
clickable links to captured GeoTime visualization states, called
snapshots. A distinction should be drawn here between this
implementation and common hypertext systems. In this case, the
link affects the display of the GeoTime scene and does not change
context or content in the text window where the click occurs.
Also, the link invokes a view of events in space and time, which
are the basic elements of a story that one is reading. A suitable
analogy of what is possible is that of a person reading a novel who
can instantly invoke corresponding scenes from a movie version
of the novel on a nearby screen.

It is worth noting that two different temporal systems are linked
together through the snapshots. GeoTime presents events in
chronological order and the nature of text provides the ability to
arrange information sequence in any order – part of the art of
story telling. For instance, an analyst may wish to insert a
reference to events that occurred twenty years prior to the rest of
the story. Using story text and snapshots, this sequence can be laid
out for a reader to read and click through. If only the GeoTime
view existed, the reader would have to scroll through the data
linearly in time and be left to guess at the relevance of the earlier
events. In some cases, a linear view of the events in a story may
be desirable as an alternate and objective perspective to the text.
This is accomplished by simply turning attention to the GeoTime
visualization and scrolling through events using the time slider.
One feature for future exploration is to show snapshot boundaries
in time and space and then provide links back to relevant story
text, thereby closing the loop between the two views.

Figure 7. The story window to the right of the GeoTime scene. Text
sections titled “Pattern: …” are generated by pattern functions.

Envisioning this in the context of GeoTime analysis, the analyst
is therefore able to save a view of a time-space region containing
events that support their stated analytical claims. Similarly,
Geotime also allows them to annotate and describe ideas about
specific events. For example, one could use the text of the story
“Little Red Riding Hood” and include annotated snapshots of
exactly where in the forest the Wolf and Red Riding Hood’s
space-time paths meet (assuming GPS tracking data were
available). Digging deeper, one could then point out if they just
happened to cross paths or if the wolf was waiting for someone to
walk by (this distinction would be apparent in GeoTime).
Snapshots are essentially references to a display state in
GeoTime. They capture all the required parameters to reproduce a
view, including geographic extents, time range, annotations,
point-of-view, and visibility of each data element. Snapshots are
created by clicking on the “take snapshot” button, which then
saves a snapshot and embeds a link to it in the text at the cursor.
Each snapshot is uniquely named and placed in the preview list
below the text editor, which contains thumbnail images of all
snapshots in the current document. Snapshots can be dragged
from the preview list into the text body to create a new link or one
can simply type the name of a snapshot in the text and it will be
automatically detected and highlighted. Links use the same syntax
as the references in this paper – numerals inside square brackets.
Snapshots can be placed anywhere in the text any number of
times. A preview image of a snapshot pops-up when mousing
over a text link.
When a snapshot link is invoked, GeoTime reproduces the
exact view state when it was created. This is not a static view; the
user is able to adjust any parameters or continue analyzing as
usual from this point on. This allows the reader to examine the
exact data that the author has referenced, using the same tools that
were used during authoring. For example, one could zoom out to
see more context or animate the events over time. One can also
add additional annotations and analytical depth and then feed this
back into the story as a new snapshot or text section. Existing
snapshots can be updated in the preview panel.

The story window is also leveraged by the pattern matching
system for displaying results to the user. Each time a pattern
search is executed against the dataset, a new text section is
generated containing a textual description of the nature of the
pattern and a summarization of the results. Links to snapshots of
the pattern instances in time and space that can be clicked for
rapid review and/or confirmation by the analyst are also included.
In Figure 7, the text section titled “Pattern: Meeting Result” is an
example of this. The text and links can be incorporated anywhere
in the text using standard cut and paste actions.
Aside from the formal application of the story window in
developing a story, the system can also be used to aid in
unstructured free flowing thinking. The story window and
snapshot system can be used to generate view mementos or bread
crumbs of an analyst’s progression through information. In this
sense the story window serves as a note pad and provides a
convenient location to assemble thoughts and threads of
exploration. Some users have used one text section as a scratch
pad while authoring a final report in another text section.
Although elements of the story window are familiar, the
underlying implementations and focus on storytelling for events
in time and space make it uniquely suited to many analytical
tasks. Similarity with standard interfaces helps to improve
trainability and potential adoption by analysts. The ability of the
story window to organize visualizations in a user-centered
unstructured or structured narrative space is a concept that has
potential to extend to other visualization systems.
4.3

Story Comparison and Collaboration

An important analysis technique is to evaluate alternative
explanations that may account for some given evidence [6]. The
ability to enumerate multiple possible explanations within a story
is therefore desirable. Further, multiple analysts may be involved
in contributing to the analysis or providing feedback about a story.
The story window supports these activities by providing a simple
system for categorizing and filtering sections of story text.
Every text section includes a color bar on the left side and the
colors can be changed with a right-click option. Figure 7
illustrates how this appears in the interface. This mechanism
allows the analyst to define categories within the text body. The
meaning of the colors is not predefined and the analyst can define
this based on task. For instance, in the context of “red team”

23

analysis (i.e., the devil’s advocate point-of-view), a useful
application of color would be to mark core sections of a report
blue and use red sections for red team input. If the use case was to
indicate the correctness of another analyst’s work, red may be
used to indicate a problematic section. Feedback, role-playing,
versioning, change tracking, brainstorming, war gaming, details,
back story, alternatives, and comments can also be indicated.

system can be leveraged as supporting evidence within a story.
For example, a story about a corporate scandal could include
snapshots linked to organization charts or stock price
visualizations. Recent work [16] and [17] demonstrates this use
case with charting visualizations utilized in discussions.

Immediately below the story window is a row of filter buttons
that allow the user to toggle the display of text sections by color.
By switching content on and off, the analyst is able to include or
exclude certain threads, details, or opinions in a story, thereby
changing its possible readings. One application would be to colorcode one version of the story blue, and a competing version of the
story green. Common elements could be yet another color. The
filters would allow the analyst to quickly flip from one version to
another to compare explanations for the same set of observations.
Story branches can also be set up by providing instructions within
the text to turn certain section on and off at key points. For
example, one could write in the text “click green sections ON if
you agree or red sections ON if you disagree.”

The story window is essentially an HTML text editor that
supports embedded references as hypertext links. The system
monitors a list of available named snapshots in the document and
highlights the names if they appear in the text. Clicking on one of
these links invokes the capture manager to fetch and display the
stored snapshot in the visualization. The story window contains
additional functionality to display multiple html viewers (the text
sections) by a color-defined category. This category is used by the
filter interface to hide or show text sections.

Flexibility and simplicity for the analyst were favored over task
specialization in the design. We believe there are many ways to
use text sections that we have not considered. Further
investigation is necessary to determine utility and scalability. It is
our intent that an analyst or organization will develop techniques
and protocols that suit their needs.
5

TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE

The stories system consists of four primary components: the
Visualization, the Pattern Matching System, the Story window
and the Capture Management System, shown in Figure 8. The
capture management system acts as a hub for view storage and
routing invocations to visualizations.

5.2

5.3

The stories system is written as a Java plug-in for GeoTime.
Although the implementation described here is specific to
GeoTime, the architecture is flexible enough to integrate with
other visualizations provided they can store and recall snapshots.
5.1

Capture Management System

The capture management system stores and invokes snapshots
of visualizations – in this case GeoTime space-time views. It uses
the inversion of control design pattern. A visualization must
provide the ability to capture its current view upon request. This
snapshot is stored along with an image of the snapshot scene and
is given a unique reference. Invoking the reference at a later date
will direct the visualization to recall the exact view state. It is our
assumption that any visualization that implements a capture

24

Visualization and Annotation System

GeoTime was used as the visualization system in this research
because of its applicability for representing stories about events in
time and space. The application is capable of capturing the
complete state of the visualization, including geospatial and
temporal bounds, viewpoint, and visible data. These can be
recalled by the capture management system.
GeoTime’s interface and rendering system was extended to
include the annotation types described previously. These can be
captured and recalled by the snapshot system Annotations can be
activated by external functions, as in the case of patterns, or can
be manually added by the analyst.
5.4

Pattern Matching System

The pattern matching system interacts with the GeoTime data
system, the story window, the capture management system, and
the annotation system in order to run searches and display results.
The pattern matching system includes an API to allow third party
developers to write patterns that scan over the GeoTime data. The
function must set up annotations and add them to the data and
then output a text description of the results, including snapshot
descriptions, to the story window.
6

Figure 8. The technical architecture of the stories system.

Story Window

INFORMAL EVALUATION

Over a period of six months, the Stories capabilities were
reviewed with intelligence analysts for feedback and the pattern
annotations system was tested against both reference data sets and
actual operational data. Test data included GPS vehicle tracks,
personal transaction billing data, including phone calls and credit
card transactions, and proprietary operational data sets of varying
size and nature. In order to support these different data types, the
pattern system was enhanced with controls to adjust for data
precision, frequency, and scale.
6.1

Procedure

In all cases, the test data sets were loaded into GeoTime and
presented to analysts by the researchers. The pattern search and
annotation functions were executed, generating results in the story
window, then reviewed by clicking the links provided in the text
to zoom and highlight instances of patterns in the GeoTime view.
Examples of stories based on the sample data were presented.

6.2

Feedback

In all cases, feedback was enthusiastic. It was noted that the
methods used by GeoTime Stories to display pattern search results
are well-suited to support rapid review by an analyst. In some
cases, analysts were working on their own pattern finding
functions, but did not have a way to present results effectively.
Other feedback referred to the story-telling capabilities and how
they could be used in analysis tradecraft training and for reporting
discovery to peers and decision makers. Feedback quotes include:
“The annotated story is something that could be presented to
high-level decision makers. It is obvious to see what is happening
without having to know details of the data.”
“The potential for using GeoTime Stories to capture and
communicate tradecraft processes for both reporting and training
is significant.”
“Stories would be good for explaining tradecraft. Each type of
data and situation is different, with its own properties and
patterns. You need to be able to look at it – turn it around and
understand and explain to someone new: ‘These are the important
things you will see in data– you might think this artifact looks like
behavior X, but in fact it might be something else…’ This can be
explained with examples using Stories.”
“We need to be able to capture and communicate the analytical
process. Stories let us follow a sequence of steps towards a
solution but also go back and follow-up on branches that were
missed.”
Analysts had several informal recommendations for improving
the prototype system, including:
•

Expand the number of different graphical options for manual
annotation of the event data.

•

Hide annotated events so that only the annotation is
displayed, in order to simplify the display.

•

Enhance the story system to support snapshots to other
visualization systems was also an expressed desire

•

Provide a way to tag and add more categories of story text
sections is necessary.

•

Export story documents as standard Microsoft-compatible
formats.

Additional pattern functions and tuneable pattern parameters
were deemed necessary. Specific proprietary pattern functions
were of interest. Additional work would be required to integrate
them with the Stories pattern API.
6.3

Findings

Our findings mostly pertain to the utility of the pattern system
in finding and expressing patterns reflecting the bottom-up aspect
of the GeoTime Stories capabilities. For almost every data set, it
was necessary to adjust pattern-finding parameters to manage the
relevancy of results. This was expected due to differences in
geospatial scale, precision, frequency, and other characteristics of
the data. For example, a meeting may be defined as two people
located within 50m and 5 minutes of each other, or, at a global
level, it might be two people in the same city on the same day.
The utility of a pattern algorithm will depend on many factors,
including the character of the data and the analytical task. It was

beyond the scope of this research to automatically tune algorithms
for any given data set; however we believe such a capability is
necessary to provide a truly automated pattern annotation system.
In the sample data we tested, the meeting finder successfully
identified potential meeting times and locations. Analysts liked
being able to step through snapshots of each meeting result set in
the text window. Feedback on the movement speed annotation
function was that it provided a quick sense of the behaviour of a
track. Annotating extreme-speed movements was considered
especially useful because it could indicate errors in the data and
other conditions of special analytical value.
There was expressed interest and encouragement to continue
the work and pursue ongoing tests and development in operational
environments. Analysts noted, “You are going in the right
direction with Stories in all three areas – patterns, annotation, and
narrative. We could use this now.”
6.4

Future Evaluation and Development

A formative evaluation of GeoTime Stories capabilities run by
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is
planned for late summer 2007. This evaluation will collect
analyst-centered data about the interaction of analysts with
GeoTime Stories, for the purpose of integrating usability and
utility findings and feedback from analysts into the development
process. The evaluation is designed in two parts. The first will
examine the ability of analysts to create GeoTime Stories reports
about an ecologically valid task, consisting of events and entities
interacting in time and space. The second part will examine how
an analyst reads a completed GeoTime Stories report concerning
an unfamiliar scenario and how they contribute additional
information or commentary to the report.
7

CONCLUSION

Storytelling is an effective means of communication and
collaboration and is used by analysts for reporting complex events
to other analysts and decision-makers. In this paper, we have
investigated how the concept of story relates to the process of
analysis and how it can be supported in the GeoTime visualization
software. A model of story concepts was developed and two
approaches were identified to guide the design of the system:
•

A bottom-up approach, in which patterns in a visualization of
low-level data are annotated so that analysts can quickly
recognize higher-level behaviors using their tacit knowledge.

•

A top-down approach, in which the analyst can preserve
moments of insight and explain them to others in the form of
a story that can be told to, or read by others.

We have implemented mechanisms to support these
approaches. First, to support a bottom-up approach, the pattern
system automatically detects basic pattern types in event data and
then graphically annotates them within GeoTime. To support a
top-down approach, the story window allows for authoring and
telling of analytic stories and provides the means to connect
explanation to views of events in time and space. Thus, the
analyst can link analytical thought and hypotheses to moments in
information time and space. We have also added the ability to
categorize parts of a story and toggle their display as a way to
insert detail or collaborate on content. We believe this mechanism

25

also enables the representation of multiple versions of stories and
perspectives.
It is our intent that these capabilities will help analysts
communicate insights and explanations in an expressive analytical
product and that the ability to perform analyses at a higher-level
of abstraction – the level of a story – is made possible. Feedback
from reviews with analysts was positive and encouraging and
indicates that these capabilities could reduce the time analysts
spend on low-level data analysis and report generation.
We believe that these techniques can be applied in other
visualization systems and that visualizations of data are more
effective if they are linked to explanations. Ideally, all
visualization systems should include a scene-capture mechanism
that can be integrated with external systems.
8

FUTURE WORK

Our next steps will include additional testing with analysts and
identification of selected story detection, storytelling, and sensemaking capabilities to be included within future versions of the
deployed GeoTime analysis product. This should improve
GeoTime by reducing visual clutter, increasing scalability,
reducing effort and, most importantly, improve the interpretation
and comprehension of significant patterns within the data.
We also anticipate that GeoTime Stories is an effective way to
capture and teach tradecraft to new analysts. The ability to
incorporate explanation of tradecraft within an actual analytical
tool is a significant benefit. This could be superior to classroom
training, manuals, on-line training, and other common techniques.
It seems that GeoTime Stories could provide a one-on-one-withexpert training experience in a repeatable and flexible form.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was supported and monitored by the National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) under Contract Number
HM1582-05-C-0022.
The views, opinions, and findings
contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should not
be construed as an official Department of Defense position,
policy, or decision, unless so designated by other official
documentation. The authors wish to thank DTO and all DTO and
NGA staff for their support and encouragement.
REFERENCES

26

[1]

Fisher, Walter R. “Narration as Human Communication Paradigm:
The Case of Public Moral Argument”, Communication Monographs
51. pp. 1-22., 2004.

[2]

Gee, K. “The Ergonomics of Hypertext Narrative: Usability Testing
as a Tool for Evaluation and Redesign”, ACM J. Computer.
Documentation, 25. pp 3-16., 2001

[3]

Gemmell, Jim, Bell, Gordon, Lueder, Roger, Drucker, Steven, and
Wong, Curtis, “MyLifeBits: Fulfilling the Memex Vision”, ACM
Multimedia '02, December 1-6, 2002, Juan-les-Pins, France, pp. 235238.

[4]

Gershon, W., Page W. “What Storytelling can do for Information
Visualization”, Communications of the ACM. 44(8). pp 31-37. 2001

[5]

Herman, D., “Spatial Cognition in Natural-Language Narratives”,
Proceedings of the AAAI Fall Symposium on Narrative
Intelligence., 1999.

[6]

Heuer, Richard, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, Center for the
Study of Intelligence, 1999.

[7]

Johnston, R., Analytic Culture in the U.S. Intelligence Community,
Center for the Study of Intelligence, Government Printing Office,
Pittsburgh, PA. 2005

[8]

Joshi, D., Wang, J. Z., Li, J. “The Story Picturing Engine-a system
for automatic text illustration”, ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput.
Commun. Appl. 2(1), pp. 68-89. 2006

[9]

Kapler, T. and Wright W., “GeoTime Information Visualization”,
IEEE InfoViz, 2004.

[10] Kapler, T. and W. Wright, “GeoTime Information Visualization”,
Information Visualization Journal, Palgrave Macmillan, 4(2),
Summer 2005, 136-146.
[11] Laurel, B., Computers as Theatre. Addison-Wesley, New York, USA
, 1993.
[12] Plaisant, C., Milash, B., Rose, A., Widoff, S., and Shneiderman, B.,
“LifeLines: Visualizing personal histories”, Proceedings of CHI `96,
ACM, New York, (1996), 221-227
[13] Plowman L, Luckin, R., “Designing multimedia for learning:
narrative guidance and narrative construction”, CHI '99: Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pp 310-317, 1999.
[14] Vaucelle C. “A System to Compose Movies for Cross-Cultural
Storytelling: Textable Movie”, Proceedings of TIDSE, June 24-26,
vol. 3105 pp. 126-131. 2004.
[15] Zellweger, P. T., Mangen, P., Newman, P. “Reading and Writing
Fluid Hypertext Narratives”, Proceedings of the thirteenth ACM
conference on hypertext and hypermedia. Conference on Hypertext
and Hypermedia. pp 45-54. 2002.
[16] Heer, J., Viegas, F.B., Wattenberg, M., “Voyagers and Voyeurs:
Supporting Asychronous Collaborative Information Visualization”,
CHI 2007 Proceedings
[17] Web site www.Many-eyes.com, downloaded July18, 2007
[18] Harper, R., T. Kapler, W. Wright, “Correlating Events with Tracked
Movements in Time and Space", In Proc. International Conference
on Intelligence Analysis, 2005
[19] Xiao, L., Gerth, J., Hanrahan, P., “Enhancing Visual Analysis of
Network Ttraffic Using a Knowledge Representation”, IEEE VAST
2006

1

Ryan Eccles – reccles@oculusinfo.com
Thomas Kapler – tkapler@oculusinfo.com
3
Robert Harper – rharper@oculusinfo.com
4
William Wright – bwright@oculusinfo.com
2

