Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Visual Analysis of Usage Efficiency of Library Books
LIU Kan1, LIU Ping2
1
School of Information, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan, 430074
2
School of Information Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072
liukan@znufe.edu.cn, pliuleeds@126.com

2. Related Works

Abstract
Nowadays the amount of books available in
libraries has grown rapidly. Readers may find it
difficult to decide which book(s) should be borrowed.
The log data of loan history is a good source to find
popular books that readers may be interested. This
paper describes our efforts in exploring various visual
techniques to analyze the borrowing history of the
books in a university’s library. The visual analysis
provides effective way to extract the book usage
information and find breakthrough insights. Initial
experiment has demonstrated that the proposed
approach benefit users in selecting books more
effectively.

Visual Analysis has become an increasingly
important topic in order to deal with the rapidly
growing amounts of data in very different areas. The
goal of visual analysis is to enable the understanding of
massive datasets. Visual techniques can help users to
find and analyze the information hidden in the sheer
amount of data. For example, many visual techniques
have been applied in digital libraries for visual
information retrieval [1-4] and electronic document
reading [5-8]. Parallel coordinates and Tree map are
two of the widely used information visualization
techniques. Parallel coordinates [9] is one of the
leading
methodologies
for
multidimensional
visualization. The real strength of parallel coordinates
is in modeling relations between the variables.
Compared with Parallel coordinates technique, Tree
map [10] has the advantage of displaying information
about entities with a hierarchical relationship. Tree map
allows end users to easily recognize complicated data
relationships that are otherwise non-obvious.
In this paper, we adopt visual techniques to analyze
the loan history of books in libraries. It can be regarded
as a part of user behavior analysis. Most research on
user behavior such as [11, 12] focus on issues such as
how many times users visited library, how many books
they borrowed per month/year, which digital journals
they read online, and so on. These researches are only
useful for librarians to evaluate their services. Actually
these data can be used for readers to analysis the usage
efficiency of each book in libraries, such as which
books are the popular books in recent period, which
books are suitable for undergraduate students, etc. Our
research aims to deeply analyze the usage of each book
and provides facilities that individual user can benefit
from.

1. Introduction
Nowadays the amount of books available in libraries
has grown rapidly. Readers may find it difficult to
decide which book(s) should be borrowed because the
description of a book (author(s), publisher, publish date,
pages, preface, etc.) is quite simple and is hard for
readers to compare. In such situation, comments from
previous readers of the books are very useful. However
most libraries do not provide the platform for readers
to post their own comments on the books they have
borrowed and read. Fortunately the loan history of
books kept in libraries is a good indicator of the usage
of each book and can be analyzed to recommend good
books for novice. In this paper we employ visual
techniques (such as tree map, parallel coordinates,
horizontal bar, stacked lines and rank table) to analyze
the usage of books. We demonstrate that visual analysis
can be combined with existing library system and
support users finding useful books more quickly and
efficiently.

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.32

371

number of days that the book is on loan in last 12
months. The whole usage efficiency of a book is
calculated by the following formula: U = du/ du
+db, while du represents the number of days that
the book is on loan and db represents the number
of days that the book belongs to the library.
Impact factor is similar to the journal impact
factor from journal citation report, the impact
factor of a book is calculated by dividing the
usage efficiency of last year by the whole usage
efficiency of the book: IF = U1 / U
The half life of a book refers to the date when half
of loans happen. The total times of loan continues
adding by years and in which year it reaches 50%.
For example, the book “OpenGL programming
guide (1999)” has a total of 74 times of loan, and
the 37th loan happened on July 2003, so the half
life for this book is 07-2003. The implication of
half life is that the closer the date, the more
popular the book is.

3. Visual Analysis
3.1. The Data Acquisition and Terms
To analyze the users borrowing behavior, the log
data of each borrowing and returning activity has been
collected (e.g. as shown in Table 1). In addition users’
personal information (such as student’s major, grade,
staff’s title, position) and book details information are
also obtained from libraries database. Table 2 and
Table 3 show some examples of book information and
user information.

♦

♦

Table 1. The data set of each borrowing and
returning
Loan_id

UserId

BookId

Start

Return

060209
060452
060106
……

Bio-101
Cs-206
Cs-001

J3 HOR
S3WAT
S3WAT

06-2-12
06-4-21
06-1-7

06-2-18
06-4-26
06-3-22

3.2. Mining the Popular Books

Table 2. The data set of the sample books
BookId

Title

Author

Publication

S3WAT 3D graphics

A.Watt

J3HOR Big Java

C. Horst Wiley & Sons

Year

When search for books by keywords, quite often
there are so many books retrieved. For example, when
search for books with “JAVA” in the title, 232 books
are returned. Even when the parameter is restricted as
“year >2000”, there are still 129 books. It is a heavy
burden for users to go through each of them. Mining
popular books can help users in the selection process.
In general, books with high frequencies of loan are
popular books. Stacked lines can be used to display the
loan frequency of books. Users can pick up some
similar books and observe the trends of these books
within a period. For example, Figure 1 displays three
books and their loan frequencies in last two years.
From this figure we can see that the book “3D
computer graphics” is much more popular than the
other two in last two years.

AddisonWesley 2000
2006

……

Table 3. The data set of users
UserId
Cs-001
Cs-206
Bio-101
……

Name
Ken James
Dache Zhu
David John

Position
Prof.
PhD
Master

Major
Computer Science
Computer science
Biology

These tables provide basic information of borrowing
behavior: who borrowed which book and at what time.
These data are available in any library. In this research,
we get the data from Edward Boyle library, University
of Leeds, UK. These data provide important
information to detect popular books and the most
suitable books for readers. We use three important
criteria, i.e. impact factor, half life and usage efficiency
to rank, evaluate, and compare these library books.
Some important terms related to these criteria are
defined as follows.
♦ Frequency refers to the number of times that a
book was borrowed within a period.
♦ Usage efficiency is a measurement of which books
are in-use in a particular period. For example the
usage efficiency of a book in last year U1 is
calculated as U1= dy/ 365, while dy represents the

)UHTXHQF\

&RPSDULVRQ IRU ERRNV

' FRPSXWHU
JUDSKLFV




7KH DUW RI '
FRPSXWHU
DQLPDWLRQ DQG
HIIHFWV












       
0RQWK

&RPSXWHU
JUDSKLFV DQG
JHRPHWULF
PRGHOLQJ

Figure 1. Stacked lines for different books
It is noticed the loan frequencies of books may be
affected by many factors. For example, a new book

372

may have a low loan frequency at beginning.
Furthermore users’ selection does not depend on the
loan frequency only. Other factors such as half life,
publish year, impact factor are also important for users
in the selection process. We use tree map to visualize
the detailed loan information of books. Figure 2
presents a visual display of retrieved books from a
user’s query using Tree map. Here these books are in
the subject of “computer graphics” and the publish year
is after 1999. The detailed information of a book
includes title, author, publish year, price, subject, ISBN,
impact factor, half life, and so on. The result is
clustered by the publish year. With interactions, users
can change the hierarchal organization according to
subject, author, and publisher. Each square refers to a
book, where the color demonstrates the loan frequency
of the book, the book in deep color (e.g. red) has a high
frequency and the bright color (e.g. blue) has a low
frequency. The color can be changed to indicate the
impact factor or half life according to a user’s need.

popular in 2 years ago. From figure 3 we know that
most of the readers of this book are undergraduate
students.

Figure 3. Details of the frequency of a select book

3.4. Interactions
Sometimes users may have complicated request. For
example, they want to know “which books have high
frequencies (more than 30 times) and have been
borrowed only by research fellows or postgraduates in
last two years?” We can define SQL query to answer
this question as follows:
select books from xx.table
where ((years > 2004)
and (frequency > 30)
and ((user_type = ‘research fellows’) or
(user_type=‘postgraduates’)))
Parallel coordinates provides an easy and intuitive
method to visually query a data set. There are 6
variables in the data sets: book title, loan frequency,
impact factor, half life, publish year and user type. This
6-dimensional data tuple is visualized in parallel
coordinates as a polyline. The user can select ranges
from y-axes, i.e., select frequency more than 30, AND
publish year > 2004, AND user type as postgraduate or
research fellow. This kind of set of connected ranges is
corresponding to a query performed on a database
management system. With interactive parallel
coordinates, answers to above SQL query can be easily
illustrated as seen in Figure 4. The parallel coordinates
also gives the average of the selected books. Boxplot
reflects the distribution of the data on each coordinate.

Figure 2. Tree map for selected books

3.3. Mining the Individual Features
Section 3.2 describes how to mine the popular books.
However differences between user groups are ignored.
For the books in university libraries, some are suitable
for undergraduate students, some for postgraduate
students, and some for research fellows or professors.
Therefore visual display of user information is
necessary. In our visual analysis, stacked area and
horizontal bar are used to solve this kind of problem.
For example, Figure 3 displays the loan frequency
curve of the book: “Computer graphics and
applications” with different color show the different
kinds
of
users:
undergraduates;
postgraduates(Master/PhD students) and staff(teachers
and research fellows). The vertical line indicates the
half life of the book, which helps users know when the
book was popular. In this example, the book was

Figure 4. Parallel coordinates for query interactions

373

No.

4. Test

1

To evaluate our approach we have implemented the
visual analysis system and integrated it into the
university’s library system. Figure 5 is the main
interface of the system. The top half of the page is
query system now in use in Edward Boyle library.
When a user gets the result of a query, the visual
analysis is displayed at the bottom half of the page.
Tree map, Parallel coordinates and Horizontal Bar can
be selected by the user.

2
3
4
5

Top five Books for
Undergraduates
OpenGL : a primer
Computer Graphics
(2nd Edition)
Interactive Computer
Graphics
The
VRML
2.0
Handbook
GIMP
Pocket
Reference

Top five Books for
Postgraduates
Interactive Computer
Graphics
3D user interfaces:
theory and practice
Scientific
Visualization
OpenGL : a primer
Introduction to virtual
reality

To further test this system, we randomly select 90
users (46 undergraduate students, 28 postgraduate
students and 16 staff) to use this system and give
comments. Most users (over 88 percent) think it is
useful in saving searching time and selecting suitable
books. Without the help of visual analysis, only half of
readers were satisfied with the books they borrowed.
However, with the help of visual analysis, three
quarters of users were satisfied. The feedback from
undergraduate and postgraduate students is better than
staff since latter are more familiar with the publications
in their specific research areas.

5. Conclusions
The increasing volume and diversity of information
in library is demanding new approaches for book
retrieval. Visual analysis of library books usage can
help users to discover useful information which is
normally hidden in the huge amount of log data. In this
paper we have employed several visual techniques to
help users obtain important information of library
books. Initial experiment shows that visual analysis
could support users in selection of desirable books. We
are going to conduct further experiments and collect
more user feedbacks. We also want to evaluate our
approach for digital resource in the future. Visual
analysis for the electric books is another direction of
the research.

Figure 5. Main interface for visual analysis system
The rank of frequency for the books in a subject can
be got easily from the loan data set. In the help of
visual analysis system, the user can quickly find some
highly required books for his/her own category
(undergraduate, postgraduate, and staff) as shown in
Tables 4 and 5.
Table 4. The top 5 books on the subject of
“computer graphics” in terms of loan times
No
1
2
3
4
5

Author(s)
Hearn
D.,
Baker M.P.
Angel,
Edward
Hartman J,
Wernecke J
Neumann
S,Toporek C
Angel
Edward

Book Title
Computer Graphics
(2nd Edition)
OpenGL : a primer

Frequency
132

The VRML 2.0
Handbook
GIMP
Pocket
Reference
Interactive
Computer Graphics

96

122

91

Acknowledgements
This work is sponsored by the scientific research
foundation for the returned overseas Chinese scholars,
state education ministry.

89

References
[1] Buering, T., Reiterer, H., “ZuiScat – Querying and
visualizing information spaces on personal digital assistants”,
In MobileHCI 2005, Human computer interaction with
Mobile devices and services, New York, ACM Press.

Table 5. The top 5 books on the subject of
“computer graphics” in terms of loan times for
different groups of readers

374

Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on
Digital libraries, 2004, USA, pp.125-134.
[8] Crane, G., Smith, D.A., and Wulfman, C.E., “Building
a hypertextual digital library in the humanities: A case study
on London”. In Proceedings of the First ACM+IEEE Joint
Conference on Digital Libraries, 2001, pp.426-434.
[9] Inselberg,A.,“The plane with parallel coordinates”,
The Visual Computer, 1985(1), pp.69-91.
[10] Shneiderman, B., “Tree visualization with tree-maps:
2-d space-filling approach”. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
1992, 11(1), pp.92-97.
[11] Pam, B. and Chris, M., “Use of book borrowing
statistics as a means to establish library use by preregistration nursing students: a case study at the University of
Northumbria”, Library and Information Research News,
2002, 26(83), pp.36-43.
[12] Peters, T.A., “The history and development of
Transaction Log Analysis”, Library HiTech, 1993, 42(11),
pp.41-66.

[2] Vakkari, P., Sormunen, E., “The influence of relevance
levels on the effectiveness of interactive information
retrieval”, Journal of the American society for information
science and technology, 2004, 55(11), pp.358-374.
[3] Buchanan, G., Blandford, A., Thimbleby, H., and Jones
M., “Integrating information seeking and structuring:
exploring the role of spatial hypertext in a digital library”. In
Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on Hypertext
and hypermedia, 2004, pp.225-234.
[4] Börner, K., Dillon, A., and Dolinsky, M., “LVis Digital
Library Visualizer”, In Information Visualisation 2000,
London, England, pp.77-81.
[5] Chu, Y.C., Bainbridge, D., Jones, M.,and Witten, I.H.,
“Realistic books: a bizarre homage to an obsolete medium”.
In Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on
Digital libraries, Tuscon, 2004, USA, pp.78-86.
[6] Card, S.K., Hong, L., Mackinlay, J.D., and Chi, E.H.,
“3Book: a 3D electronic smart book”. In proceedings of the
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, 2004,
Gallipoli, Italy, pp.303-307.
[7] Shiaw, H., Robert, J., and Jacob, K., “The 3D vase
museum: a new approach to context in a digital library”. In

375

