Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Object based Clustering using Hybrid Algorithms
Nor Hafizah Abd. Razak, Noridayu Manshor, Mandava Rajeswari, Dhanesh Ramachandram
Computer Vision Research Group, Universiti Sains Malaysia
{feeza_11@yahoo.com, idayu@cs.usm.my, mandava@cs.usm.my,dhaneshr@cs.usm.my}
reached. These days, a large number of clustering
algorithms have been developed [2] applications such as
pattern recognition, image processing, document
retrieval, and data mining. Motivated by the work of
Hongbin Wang[4] and Mikolajczyk [5,7] in addressing
the problem of building object class recognition based on
local features using hybrid algorithms, this paper come
out with hybrid algorithms of hierarchical and k – means
for object based clustering using global features rather
than local features applied in [4,5,7]. The purpose of
object class recognition is to capture the variability of
appearance and shape of different objects belonging to
the same class, while avoiding confusing objects from
different classes [5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13]. Most of the local
features used in [4,5] problems extract texture feature of
the regions such as SIFT[8] and do not consider the
shape features of the objects. This may create problems
during recognition process. For example car and bus
have similar local features but it can be discriminated by
using shape features. From human perception,
knowledge of object’s shape is one of the most important
low level image features to describe objects in images
such as in object detection problems [10, 11, 12]. It helps
to increase the recognition accuracy by more than 10%
[13].
In this paper, we have investigated a hybrid
algorithm. Unlike traditional K-means algorithm, our
hybrid algorithm does not need the parameter k to
initialize the number of clusters. In our method a new
cluster will be created if the distance between any data
and existing cluster exceeds a given threshold. Although
for object based domain it may be a case where the
numbers of clusters are easily defined by human, but for
a machine, the extracted features may not generate the
same number of clusters produces by human. Therefore,
the need to verify the performance of the hybrid
algorithms in object based clustering becomes the main
focus in this work by using shape and texture features.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section
discusses related works that make use of hybrid
algorithms in their application. Sections 3 describes our
object based clustering
which focuses on two
fundamental steps features extraction and clustering
using hybrid algorithms. Section 4 presents the
performance of the hybrid algorithms through a set of

Abstract
This paper presents a hybrid algorithm for object based
clustering. The algorithm is designed based on hybrid of
hierarchical and k-means clustering algorithm. For this
work, we used dataset consist of natural imagery
collected from PASCAL database 2006 collection and
Google images. A collection of low level features image
is used to validate the performance of our approach.
Experimental results show that hybrid algorithm
produced higher accuracy compared to k-means and
hierarchical algorithm by up to 25%.
Keywords--- object based clustering, K-means,
Hierarchical, hybrid algorithm.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a process of organizing unlabeled
objects into group of objects that have similar
characteristics in some way [1]. Clustering approaches
are often categorize into hierarchical methods and
partitional methods [1, 2, 3]. Hierarchical method
organizes data in the form of hierarchical structure which
is also known as dendogram [2]. The structure can be
generated through divisive or agglomerative manner.
Divisive structure begins the clustering process with all
objects in one cluster and then, it will be manually
divided into smaller clusters. Meanwhile agglomerative
clustering starts with each data considered as a cluster.
Data will be grouped gradually into larger cluster, in
which data joined together at lower level are more tightly
clustered than ones joined together at higher levels. The
most popular methods in this class are the single – link
and complete – link algorithms [2].
Partitional method, acquires a single partition of the
data instead of clustering structure [2]. K-means is
among the simplest clustering algorithms in this group. It
requires determining the ‘k’ value, which refers to the
number of final clusters required. The difference
between algorithms are hierarchical algorithm do not
partition objects into disjoint clusters as K-means does.
In hierarchical clustering, the clustering process is
performed data by data whereas K-means algorithm
iterates over the whole dataset until convergence is

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.53

12

about object’s shape. For example, [4, 5, 7] used SIFT
features as local features which use histogram of gradient
orientation. Aulia
[6] make used of hierarchical
algorithm to obtain k parameter as an input to k-means
clustering algorithm. Meanwhile [5,7] focused on
clustering large datasets. Finally, T-Cluster algorithm by
Hongbin Wang [4], this algorithm is an adaptation of
hierarchical and k-means algorithms. For our research,
we exploit shape and texture features to investigate
classification accuracy of the hybrid algorithm [4] on
object class recognition problem.

experimental results. Finally, the conclusion and future
work are presented in Section 5.

2. Related Works
In the literature, many research works have made
use of hybrid algorithms and succeeded to some degree,
to apply clustering such mechanisms in different type of
applications such as categorizing biological objects [4],
object class representation [5, 7], and image
segmentation [6]. In [4, 5, 7] used SIFT local features
and in [6] combined color and texture features for object
classification.
Hongbin Wang [4] proposed a novel approach for
categorizing of similar non – rigid biological objects for
unsegmented scene in an unsupervised manner. A local
appearance based on plankton recognition system has
been developed with the main goal to perform clustering
without pre segmentation and a system which is robust to
clutter and partial occlusion. They proposed a novel
clustering algorithm called T – Cluster to cluster the
local patches. This novel algorithm is a hybrid of
agglomerative hierarchical and k-means clustering
algorithm. In this approach, object categorization is done
by extracting the local patches from the test image and
matched with the patches in the training model based on
Bayesian statistic [4].
The authors in [5, 7] also used local features for
building object class recognition. In this study, the
hybrid is done in hierarchical manner. First, the features
are partitioned using K-means clustering algorithm. After
that, agglomerative clustering is independently used
within each partition. Finally, in order to cluster all the
cluster centers produced from the previous step, the
agglomerative method is applied again shown. The
algorithm has of efficiency and at the same time
maintaining the quality of the clusters [5].
Aulia [6] modified k – means clustering algorithm to
improve image segmentation for an object – based
system. The attention is to improve the capture of
regions in order to enhance the performance of indexing
and retrieval process. HSV color space is applied for
color feature extraction and the Haar wavelet transform
for texture feature extraction. A clustering process is
performed on every pixel in the image to group similar
pixel together in order to form objects. The modified k –
means algorithm is a hybrid of hierarchical and k –
means clustering algorithms. In their algorithm,
hierarchical algorithm is first used to produce the number
of cluster centers which will then be used as a k value for
the k – means clustering algorithm. This approach helps
in minimizing the computational cost especially in a
system which requires a large database.
Based on the literatures that have been reviewed, we
find that most researches [4, 5, 7] tend to use local
features, which described image patches to classify the
object class. Local features are computed at multiple
points in the image and thus, it more robust to occlusion
and image clutter. Most local features represent textures
in an image patch and do not provide any information

3. Hybrid Classifiers
This section describes our proposed hybrid
algorithm. Figure 1 illustrates the workflow involves in
our work. Begin with image segmentation. This is
followed by feature extraction. Finally, end with object
clustering. Details regarding this methodology are
described in the next sub-section.

Figure 1 Process Workflow

3.1 Feature extraction
Before feature extraction phase, an image is manually
segmented to generate the objects. At this stage, various
features will be examined to investigate their influence
on clustering performance. In this work, global features
such as shape and texture feature are used. The reason of
applying the global features is because they produce very
compact representation of images [8] and shape is an
important feature in terms of object clustering. Shape

13

features are generated by computing the moment
invariants of the object. A set of seven 2-D moments
invariants that are insensitive to translation, scale,
change, mirroring, and rotation are calculated. For
texture feature, calculation of statistical properties such
as contrast, correlation, and homogeneity from the graylevel co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) are used. These
features are normalized using the statistical
normalization approach. Finally, in step 3 the normalized
features values are clustered. In this phase, hybrid
algorithms of hierarchical and k-means is used to cluster
the features. Section 3.2 will further discuss about the
algorithm.

In our experiments, 50 images from five different
classes of PASCAL database and Google images such as
bus, car, people, dog, and horse are manually segmented
to obtain segmented objects before going through the
feature extraction and clustering phase. The images are
showed in Appendix A.
Table 1 represents the result of K-means,
Hierarchical and Hybrid algorithm in clustering different
types of features. According to percentage of accuracy
given, it is interesting to note that the performance of
hybrid algorithm in clustering shape features has
produced lower percentage compared to texture and
combination of shape and texture features. This may be
due to the inaccuracy of segmentation. Details regarding
this issue are described in sub-section 4.1. Meanwhile,
combination of shape and texture features has produced
highest accuracy compared to the others. It seems that
the combination features help to overcome the problem
of clustering shape features alone. This may be because
texture features consider on texture of pixel or patches
contain in the region. Therefore the classification of
hybrid algorithm appears to perform well in combination
of texture and shape features.

3.2 Object clustering
T-cluster algorithm by Hongbin Wang [4] is a
hybrid of hierarchical and k-means clustering algorithm.
Based on [4], the performance of the algorithm for its
time complexity is the same as agglomerative
hierarchical clustering in the worse case (when number
of cluster equals number of data point) and is same as kmeans in the best case when number of cluster is small.
For this work, based on T-cluster algorithm we
developed our algorithms. Figure 2 shows the block
diagram of the algorithm.

Table 1 Classification results based on three
Hybrid
Features K-Means Hierarchical algorithm
shape

58.00%

26.00%

42.00%

texture
shape and
texture

56.00%

26.00%

52.00%

58.00%
26.00%
features

66.00%

4.1 Discussions
Based on experimental results, we discovered that
shape features are not able to generate satisfactory
clustering result as compare to texture features. The
factors that may lead to this issue were identified. The
first reason refers to the quality of data used for this
work. This is because global features (shape) applied in
this work are sensitive to occlusion. The segmented
results of some of the objects contain noise. This may
have affected the performance of the clustering
algorithms. Figure 3 shows example of occluded object
and Figure 4 represents the boundary detected from this
occluded object.

Figure 2 Block diagram of our hybrid algorithm
The hybrid algorithm will create a new cluster if the
distance between any data and existing cluster exceed a
threshold value. The threshold value is defined by the
standard deviation of current cluster distribution is
shown below [4].
Threshold = 2.5* std (current cluster)

(1)

The process of clustering the data set will continue until
the cluster centers and cluster number are not change.

Figure 3 Occluded object

4. Experimental Results

14

algorithm also cannot incorporate a prior knowledge
about the global shape or size of clusters. K-means
algorithm generates better result accuracy compare to
hierarchical algorithm. The main reason is because in
this work we already know the ‘k’ value to be used.
However, there are still some misclassification occurs.
Our hybrid algorithm has advantage that it did not
require the number of cluster to be used. Besides, the
threshold concept applied in this algorithm proved to be
efficient as a starting point in creating new cluster.

Figure 4 Detected boundary of occluded
object
Second reason for the clustering problem, may be
the use of moment invariants for generating features in
this work is inadequate to accurately represent the object
shape. Fourier descriptors may be a better alternative to
the problem. Fourier descriptors have proved to
outperform most other boundary-based approaches in
terms of classification accuracy and efficiency as verified
in [9]. In addition, format of images also plays an
important part in computing moment invariants. Bitmap
images generate clear boundaries where as the
boundaries generated in JPEG images contain noise. This
may have contributed to the poor classification
performance. This problem may easily be resolved by
using morphological processing to remove noise. Figure
5 shows the different quality of boundary region produce
by Bitmap format and JPEG format.

Boundary region in
Bitmap image
format

5. Conclusion
In this work, hybrid of k-means and hierarchical
algorithms are integrated to produce a powerful
algorithm for object based clustering. Two different
stages, feature extraction and clustering are evaluated
independently to establish the overall effectiveness of the
overall method. For feature extraction part, the results
show that texture features play an important role to the
effectiveness of clustering operation in this work. In the
next stage, data set consist of 5 classes which is horse,
dog, people, car, and bus are used to validate the
performance of hybrid algorithm with hierarchical and kmeans algorithm. Four experiments are executed and the
result retrieved by each algorithm is compared based on
accurateness. From the comparison, it shows that hybrid
algorithms generate the most accurate clustering output.
Small samples size has given us the advantages to
understand the trend and functioning of the hybrid
algorithm and the overall clustering process. For the
future work, we will add more other shape features to
represent the objects accurately. The feature selection
should depend on the set of images to be applied. In this
work, the hybrid algorithm only validated through 50
numbers of images only. Future work may focus on
comprehensive validation of the proposed algorithm with
large selection of images.

Boundary region in
JPEG image format

Figure 5 Comparison of boundary detection in
Bitmap and JPEG image format

References
[1] S. M. Rui Xu, Ieee And Donald Wunsch Ii, Fellow,
Ieee, "Survey Of Clustering Algorithms," Ieee
Transactions On Neural Networks, Vol. 16, May

In contrast to shape features, texture features appear
more robust to minor inaccuracies in image
segmentation. In our sample images, horse and dog have
same color and shape but different texture patterns. This
characteristic plays an important task in discriminating
classes for this work. This may have contributed to better
clustering performance. In this work, concept of
combining shape and texture features is just by merging
together the shape and texture features before performing
the clustering process. By introducing a weighted
approach in combining the features may create a new
solution for increasing the clustering accuracy.
For object based clustering operation in this work,
hierarchical algorithm has produced the lowest accuracy
of clustering. This is due to its limitation where it only
considers local neighbors when merging data. Compare
to other algorithms where process of merging the data
depends on the centroid value. In addition, hierarchical

2005.
[2] M. N. M. A.K. Jain, P.J. Flynn, "Data Clustering: A
Review," Acm Computing Surveys, Vol. Vol. 31, Pp.
264-323, September 1999 1999.
[3] H. G. Wilson, B. Boots, A. A. Millward, “A
Comparison Of Hierarchical And Partitional
Clustering Technique For Multispectral Image
Classification”, Ieee, 2002
[4] P. F. C. Hongbin Wang, "Biological Object
Categorization By Clustering Local Image Patches,"
International Journal Of Neural Systems, Pp. 65-72,
2004.
[5] K. M. B. Leibe, B. Schiele, "Efficient Clustering
And Matching For Object Class Recognition," In

15

British Machine Vision Conference (Bmvc)
Edinburgh, Uk, 2006.
[6] E. Aulia, "Hierarchical Indexing For Region Based
Image Retrieval," In Industrial & Manufacturing
Systems Engineering, Master Of Science In
Industrial Engineering (M.S.I.E.): Louisiana State
University, 2005, P. 65.
[7] Krystian Mikolajczyk, Bastian Leibe, Bernt Schiele,
"Local Features for Object Class Recognition," iccv,
pp. 1792-1799,
Tenth IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV'05) Volume
2, 2005
[8] Lisin, D. A., Mattar, M. A., Blaschko, M. B.,
Learned-Miller, E. G., And Benfield, M. C. 2005,
"Combining Local And Global Image Features For
Object Class Recognition", In Proceedings Of The
2005 Ieee Computer Society Conference On
Computer Vision And Pattern Recognition (Cvpr'05)
- Workshops - Vol. 03 (June 20 - 26, 2005). Cvpr.
Ieee Computer Society, Washington, Dc, 47.
[9] Kauppinen, H., Seppänen, T., and Pietikäinen, M.
1995.
“An
Experimental
Comparison
of
Autoregressive and Fourier-Based Descriptors in 2D
Shape Classification”. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 17, 2 (Feb. 1995), 201-207.
[10] D. S. Zhang and G. Lu. "A Comparative Study on
Shape Retrieval Using Fourier Descriptors with
Different Shape Signatures". In Proc. of
International Conference on Intelligent Multimedia
and Distance Education (ICIMADE01), pp.1-9,
Fargo, ND, USA, June 1-3, 2001
[11] Wei Zhang, Bing Yu, Gregory J. Zelinsky, Dimitris
Samaras, "Object Class Recognition Using Multiple
Layer Boosting With Heterogeneous Features,"
Cvpr, Pp. 323-330, 2005 IEEE Computer Society
Conference On Computer Vision And Pattern
Recognition (CVPR'05) - Volume 2, 2005
[12]J. Thureson and S. Carlsson, “Appearance based
qualitative image description for object class
recognition”, In ECCV04, pages Vol II: 518-529,
2004.
[13] J. Winn and A. Criminisi, “Object Class
Recognition at a Glance”, Proc. IEEE Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), New York,
2006.

16

17

Appendix A

