Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

A Visual analytics Framework for the Examination Timetabling Problem
J. Joshua Thomas1, Ahamad Tajudin Khader2, Bahari Belaton3
1

School of Computer Sciences Artificial Intelligence Lab, University Sains Malaysia
joshopever@yahoo.com
2
School of Computer Sciences University Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang Malaysia
tajudin@cs.usm.my
3
School of Computer Sciences University Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang Malaysia
bahari@cs.usm.my

individual needs and preferences. At University Sains
Malaysia, for example, some examination conflict with as
many as 450 others out of 600, and the average number of
conflicts per course is roughly 50. Nowadays the solution
techniques usually employed are “computer-assisted”
manual approaches or relatively heuristics based. In
recent years, a number of heuristics algorithms have been
developed and used on convenient examination
timetabling problems. However, each of the routines was
build up for some specific problem at a particular school.
As a corollary a visual representation will be created and
show the “conflicts-less” assignment before preparing the
examination timetable which is constrain to the research
work. The paper is organized in the following manner. A
more details explanation on the background study and
related work is at section 2. Section 3 explains an ideal
examination timetabling problem. Section 4 contributes
the conceptual design. In section 5 depict the visualization
model, the problem idea, and section 6 restrains the visual
representation and significance of visualization on the
problem. Section 7 has the visualization of data and
knowledge from the raw examination time tabling data
with graph visualization. An initial development of the
pre-processing phase with the venture of graph algorithms
to visualize the examination timetabling dataset has
shown the interconnectivity between the concurrent
dataset and justifies with the graph visualization.

Abstract
The research aspiration is to develop a visual
framework for the examination timetabling problem. To
perform the task we identified visual analytics as a multidisciplinary field, directly supports the timetable
designers, assist with visual metaphors, patterns to make
decisions. Here we deemed three stages on the problem
domain. It deals with pre-processing, during the
processing and post-processing; in each of the processes
are with transaction on data which transform into
timetables. These processes are interrelated with one
another for any heuristic based, evolutionary algorithm
guided timetabling systems. However, the importance
aspect is the significance of visualization among the three
processes and how it contributes in each process. This
paper discuss two aspects, it wraps the framework with
literature and an implication on the pre-processing
through visualizing data and knowledge with graph
visualization.
KEY WORDS
Visual Analytics, Graph visualization, Examination
Timetabling.

1. Introduction

2. Related Work

The majority of the educational institutions have to
timetable a set of examinations at the end of each year or
end of the module. The problem can be defined of time
periods so that no student is required to take more than
one examination at any time. A solution of this form is
called a “conflict-less” assignment. For the last 25 years,
timetabling has become increasingly difficult in many
university schools, where the fashion has been toward a
flexible system of electives and programs tailored to

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.16

The purpose of visual framework research is to turn
the input information on the timetabling conflicts data
into visualization. It has given a chance for the decision
makers, should be able to examine substantial, multidimensional, highly constraint oriented, data stream to
make effective decisions in terms of institutional
requirements based upon time-critical situations.

305

To achieve a specific challenge of visual analysis is
that decision makers may focus their full cognitive and
perceptual capabilities on the analytical process, while
allowing them to apply into advanced computational
capabilities. In common, visual analytics can be described
as “the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by
interactive visual interfaces” [8]. To be more precise,
visual analytics is an iterative process that involves
collecting information, data preprocessing, knowledge
representation, interaction, and decision making.

A set of rooms with individual capacities re
provided.
A feasible timetable is one in which all examinations have
been assigned to a period and room and all the following
hard constraints are satisfied:
1. No student sits more than one examination at the
same time.
2. The capacity of individual rooms is not exceeded
at any time throughout the examination session.
3. Period lengths are not violated.
4. Satisfaction of period related hard constraints
e.g. Exam I after Exam II
5. Satisfaction of room related hard constraints e.g.
Exam I must use Room 201.
The soft constraints can be outlined as follows:
1. Two exams in a row
2. Two exams in a day
3. Period related soft constraints
4. Room related soft constraints

Computers and sophisticated devices create
meaningful visualizations and allow us not only to
mentally visualize data and concepts, but to actually see
and explore the representation of the data under
consideration on a computer screen. However,
transformation of data into meaningful visualizations is a
non-trivial task that cannot be automatically improved
through steadily growing computational resources. Often,
there are many diverse ways to represent the data and it is
unclear which representation is the best one. The State-ofthe art concepts of representation, perception, interaction
and decision-making need to be applied and extended to
be suitable for timetabling problem. Visual analytics is
more than just visualization and can rather be seen as an
integrated approach combining visualization, human
factors, and data analysis. A solid background work on
the complex problem solving can be identified with the
course time tabling problem in during the process with the
help of visualization techniques [6]. These groundbreaking works clutch the challenge with visual analytics
to develop a visual framework for the examination
timetabling problem.

Institutions may weight these soft constraints differently
relative to one another in an attempt to produce a solution
which is appropriate for their particular needs. This is
known as building the ‘Institutional Model’.

4. Conceptual Design
Majority of the authors believe that the
timetabling problem cannot be completely automated.
The justification is twofold: on one side, there are reasons
that make one timetable better than another one that
cannot easily be expressed in an automatic system. On the
other side, since the search space is usually huge, the
problem complexity is in an increasing phase, a human
intervention (interaction) may favoritism the search
toward promising directions that the system by itself may
not be able to find. For this reasons, most of the systems
allow the user at least to adjust manually the final output.
Some systems however require a much larger human
intervention, so that we call them interactive (or semiautomatic) timetabling systems.

3. Examination timetabling Problem
The problem involves timetabling exams into a
number of periods within a defined examination session
while satisfying a number of hard constraints. Like other
areas of timetabling, a feasible solution is one in which all
hard constraints are satisfied. The quality of the solution
is measured in terms of soft constraints satisfaction. For
example, in terms of hard constraints room numbers and
sizes are provided. In terms of soft constraints, much
more practical information is provided in terms of how an
organization measures the overall quality of a solution.

Designers start the definition of a search space
for the new product by first identifying a set of key
parameters. Then they enumerate a list of possible values
for each design parameter. In this work we design visual
forms with interactions on the examination timetabling
problem. As we identified the three stages are involved to
build the timetabling system, in each phase we introduce
the visualization aspects to get ease the work of timetable
designers. Our timetable shell is employing with
constraint satisfaction problem solving (CSP) techniques
to formulate and solve conceptual timetable problems.
Moreover CSPs are known to be NP-complete [5].

3.1 Problem description
An examination session is made of a number
of periods over a specified length of time.
A set of exams that are to be scheduled into
periods.
A set of students enrolled on individual
exams. Students enrolled on an exam are
considered to take that examination.

306

Computational assistance can offload some of
the cognitive tasks from designers so that they can
concentrate on the most creative aspects. In all the stages
as mention above have data flow in its processes.
However the pre-processing has the raw data, meaning it
is not fed inside the timetable shell to generate timetables.
In this stage, we identified two visualization mechanisms
which lend a hand to the timetable shell. As far as this
work is concern, we introduced a cluster and topological
sorting algorithm to work on the raw data to identify the
cluster of courses with student number, and the
concurrent courses which are operated for a semester are
in graph visualization. The effect on the visualization is to
give useful representation on the data with knowledge
which lead the next stage to function with minimal errors.

measure the data from various departments to generate
examination timetable even though it has been controlled
with various heuristic algorithms, human resources are
used to do produce timetable. We proposed a visual
model to classify the three phases of an examination
timetabling to help human decision makers. Preprocessing
deals with data visualization using graph algorithms. It
explains the graphs pipeline with the data and do filtering;
clustering and explicitly captures the complexity of data
itself. The visual analytics model contributes the
combination with information visualization and
exploration of data analysis which supports during
processing and after processing of the examination
timetabling phase to assist the visual modelers to make
decision making.

The problem is to find the optimal timetable
(“Rooms-Periods-Exams”); the objective to satisfy some
goals (constraints) assisted with visual analytics
framework.

In some cases, the timetabling problem consists
of finding any timetable that satisfies all constraints. In
these cases, the problem is formulated as a search
problem. In other cases, the problem is formulated as an
optimization problem. In a timetable it satisfies majority
of hard constraints and minimizes (or maximizes) a given
objective function which embeds the soft constraints. In
some approaches, the optimization formulation is just a
means to apply optimization techniques to a search
problem. In this case, what is minimized is the distance to
feasibility. Even when the problem is a true optimization
problem, the distance to feasibility may be included in the
objective function. In both cases (search and
optimization), the complexity is based on the decision of
the problem. These are to be visualized during the
processing phase.

5. Visual Representations on the problem
model:
Visual representations translate data into a
visible form that highlights important features, including
commonalities
and
irregularity.
These
visual
representations make it easy for users to distinguish
prominent aspects of their data quickly and involve the
user to explore the data [71]. This exploration requires the
user be able to interact with the data and understand
trends and patterns and engage in the analytical reasoning
process. It is a challenge [62] to create well-constructed
visual representations. However, most visual analytics
problems deal with abstract information so the researcher
is left to select the best representation for the information.

As it was proved by many authors, the
underlying problem is NP-complete in almost all variants.
Therefore, an exact solution is achievable only for small
cases (e.g. less than 10 courses), whereas real instances
usually involve a few hundreds of courses. It follows that
only heuristic methods are feasible, which do not
guarantee to reach the (optimal) solution.
We approach the underlying problem, with
visualization, an iterative process that involves collecting
the information (constraint based visualization “conflictdata”), data preprocessing,(raw) knowledge and extract
with interaction which lead to decision making with the
heavy contribution on visual analytics.
Poorly designed visualization may lead to
incorrect decision making (for example a famous poor
visualizations of the O-ring data produced before the
disastrous launch of the space shuttle Challenger Tufte
[1997]. Similarly it is necessary to know the usefulness of
the visual analysis over the examination timetabling
problem.

Figure 4. Visual Analytics Framework on the
problem
Figure 4 depict the overall representation of the
problem domain. Under complexity, the difficulty is to

307

The current knowledge K (t) follows integration over time
scale

6. Significance of Visualization

t

In this section a standard model on visualization
is proposed. Foremost, the major constituent is identified.
Subsequently, cost and gains are linked. The model is
theoretical and rudimentary, but it can be used to identify
some aspect, patterns and trends. The aspiration here is
not to position different visualization methods, but how
would it be suitable approach rather to describe the
context in which visualization operation over the
timetabling problem.

P( I , K , t )dt

K (t) = K0 +

(3)

0

where K0 is the initial knowledge.
Another important aspect is interactive exploration, here
represented by E (K). The user may decide to adapt the
measurement of the visualization, based on the current
knowledge, in order to explore the data further

dM
= E (K)
dt

(4)

Hence, the current measurement M (t) follows from
integration over time.
t

E ( K )dt

M(t)= M0 +

(5)

0

where M0 is the initial requirement.
Figure 6. Block Model

To access the visualization method is sensible; we must
access its value. The suggested cost-effective model is to
sense to measure (M) for this. Let assuming that there is a
homogenous community (the persons who has knowledge
in time table designing) consisting of n users which use a
certain visualization V to visualize a data set m times
each, where each session takes k explorative steps and
time T. This is a straightforward simplification of course.
In real case, the user community will be highly varied
with different knowledge and goals.

To recognize we illustrate the various steps in Figure 6.
Mathematically writing, we denote notation on these
aspects will give purely to the point idea and give a sense
of enumeration than as an exact and precise description.
The main process in the modal is visualization V:
I (t) = V (D, M, t )
(1)
Data D is transformed according to a measurement M into
a time varying image I (t). All these should be considered
in the broadest sense. The type of data D to be visualized
can vary from a single bit to a time-varying the
measurement M includes a requirement of the hardware
used, the algorithms to be applied in the form of selection
of a predefined method or in the form of code and the
specific parameters to be used. The image I will
frequently be an image in the usual aspect, but it can also
be an animation. The image I is perceived by a user, with
an increase in knowledge K as a solution:

dK
= P (I, K)
dt

The cost model
different levels:
o
o
o
o

associated with using V come at four
initial development costs Ci (M0),
initial user cost Cu(M0)
initial costs per session Cs(M0)
insight and exploration costs Ce(M0)

Ci (M0 ): The visualization method has to be developed
and implemented, possibly new hardware has to be
acquired.
Cu(M0): The user has to spend time to selection and
acquisition of V, understanding how to use it and linked
to the particular needs ( “conflict-less” Exam-Timetable)
Cs(M0): Data have to be converted and an initial
measurement of the visualization has to be made.
Ce(M0): The user has to spend time to watch the
visualization and understand it, as well as in modification
and tuning of the measurement , thereby exploring the
data set .( interaction)
The total costs are now given by
C= Ci + n Cu + nm Cs + nmk Ce
(6)

(2)

The amount of knowledge gained depends on the image,
the current knowledge of the user, and the particular
properties of the perception and cognition P of the user.
Concerning the influence of K, a timetable designer/
architect will be able to extract more information from the
visualization (image) than a lay person. Some people are
much better than others in spotting special patterns,
structures and configuration.

308

The return on investments consists of the value W (
( K
K)) of the acquired knowledge

K

K (T ) K (0)

per session, multiplied by the

total number of sessions:
G = nm W ( (

F

K
K)) and hence the total profit
G C we find
F = nm W ( ( K)
K ) - Cs –kCe) – Ci –nCu. (7)

This gives us to decide on the value of a visualization
method. Positive are high values for n, m, W ( K
K)) , and
low values for Ci, Cu, Cs, Ce and k. Or, in other words, a
great visualization method is used by many people;
regularly obtain highly valuable knowledge without
having to spend time and money on hardware, software,
and effort. All these are to be considered during the
development of the framework.

Figure 7. Clustering: Student data with Course
In Figure 7 shows the order between the enrolled
candidates with the course registered for a particular
semester. The arrow head indicates the link between
enrolled candidates with a course. For example, Student
number 306 registered for FCP537, FCP554, FCP552,
LKM100, 25967 registered for LKM100 and so on. The
diagram illustrates the courses verses the student number
for the same semester or current semester which is one of
the significance of visualization on this pre-processing
stage. Figure 7.1 illustrates Nodes with courses the arrow
links the constraints with slots which is not available to
allocate examination.

7. Visualization of Data and Knowledge
Variety of illustration has already presented in
information visualization [2] these models focus on
different characteristic of visualization. Shneiderman
illustrated the primary principles of visual design and
information searching through any types of data is
identified. It has given a chance for the decision makers,
should be enabled to examine substantial, multidimensional, highly constraint oriented, data stream to
make effective decisions in terms of institutional
requirements based upon time-critical situations.[1] has
modeled a visualization data into value, analytical
abstraction, visualization abstraction and views these
stages, will culminate a visualization channel [9].Derived
layer architecture for presenting cluster graphs, a group of
related nodes are clustered into hierarchical clustering and
it is highly suitable for cluster graphs. Mirrored with
clustering operations by analyzing a dataset and grouping
into clusters. Every component in the same cluster has
some similarities it was analyzed with exploratory
hierarchical clustering algorithms.
Preprocessing phase, the hypothesis/approach
consists of developing graph visualization techniques and
tools to effectively analysis the dimensions values within
nominal raw data. The techniques enable the users to
visualize the resulting information in a graphical pattern
to interact with the information spaces in a sensitive way,
and to access the data at a rate to support the exploration
process. The first step is to order the student data by
course in terms of clusters this work has tightened with
graph visualization. Here we have used a sample data
with the range of 1..55 from the examination data related
with student enrolled with courses.

Figure 7.1. Topological: Graph visualization
The colour coded nodes explains the courses
which has to be running concurrently in the semester.
This will be affecting the constraint dataset with the slot is
not available for the period allocation. The white color
square with a slash (/) has not related with the time slot so
it is not connected with the graph links.

309

This initial experiment allows us to witness graph
visualization connecting to the raw dataset. Even though
graphs algorithms are developed to view the data patterns
it has difficulties on the layouts and node overlapping. In
here, a sample raw data forms various clusters, and
topologically sorted. If we are handling a huge dataset,
information visualization techniques will be the solution
such as daisy chart and visual attribute explorer.

8. Conclusion
In this paper we have presented a literature on visual
analytics framework for the examination timetabling
problem. We presented graph visualization techniques to
help time table designers explore the raw data, evaluate
and discover new design solutions. We believe that this
will help the visual modellers to understand the nature of
data then apply into the timetable scheduler for producing
time tables involving visualization as a good
communication medium.

9. References
[1] Chi, E.H (2000): Taxanomy of Visualization Techniques
using Data Stage Reference Model in Proceedings Symposium
Information Visualization (Info Viz ’98)
[2] Keim, D.A.; Mansmann, F. and Schneidewind, J. and
Ziegler, H., Challenges in Visual Data Analysis, Proceedings of
Information Visualization (IV 2006), IEEE, p. 9-16, 2006.
[3] J.J. Thomas and K.A. Cook, eds., Illuminating the Path: The
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics, IEEE
CS Press, 2005.
[4] James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook., IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 26(1):10-13, January/February,
2006.
[5] Tsang, E. Foundations of Constraint Satisfaction, in
Academic Press, 1993.
[6] Alexander Hinneburg, D.A. Keim(2003) Visual Interaction
to solving complex optimization problems : DataVisualization:
The State-of-the- art Kulwer academic press London.
[7] Alexander Hinneburg Daniel Keim Markus Wawryniuk
(2003)
Using projections to visuallly clustering highdimensional data Computing in Science and Engineering
archiveVolume 5 , Issue 2 Pages: 14 - 25 ISSN:1521-9615
Publisher IEEE Educational Activities Department Piscataway,
NJ, USA
[8] Wenjun Zeng, Daly, S. Shawmin Lei(2000) Visual
optimization tools in JPEG2000 Image Processing, Volume 2,
pp 37-40
[9] Batista, G.D, Eades. P. Tamassia R and Tollis(1999)Graph
Drawings: Algorithms for visualizing graphs Prentice Hall

310

