Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

A three-dimensional map to outline multimedia path
Representing and memorizing heritage and architectural information
Sandro Varano¹, Didier Bur², Jean-Claude Bignon²
MAP CRAI UMR n°694/CNRS/CULTURE
¹Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Architecture de Strasbourg, 8 Boulevard du Président Wilson,
67000 Strasbourg - France
² Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Architecture de Nancy, 2 rue Bastien Lepage, BP 40435,
54001 Nancy - France
{varano@crai.archi.fr, bur@crai.archi.fr, bignon@crai.archi.fr}
Video games borrow forms and contents from the
other media, to establish new codes and propose new
aesthetics.
First, video games encourage us to interpret signs,
then to create. They would also develop skills,
transferable to other activities.
According to Jacques Perriault, games are really
instructive: they teach discoverin game rules. This
involves a learning process [1]. It is important for him to
locate these ludic practices compared to the
constructivist hypothesis: active knowledge is only
created by the person himself [2].
In this way, the notion of the learner’s mental map
introduced by Patricia Marks Greenfield is an original
contribution to which we will refer to develop our
proposal.
From an experimental point of view, first, we will
base our analysis on examples of cartography. Then, we
suggest investigating the characteristics of video games,
to identify those which may be used for the conception
of an instructive and communicative system. Finally, as a
proposal, we will outline a visualization and immersion
tool as an aid to understand archaeological and
architectural knowledge.

Abstract
This article approaches, in a sensitive way,
cartography and video games to show that spatial
perception and visualization are subjective and are
reinforced by some media.
By materializing the mental map described by
Patricia Marks Greenfield, our proposal allows the
learner to outline his path and thus his threedimensional map.
Thus, this map helps the learner in the
understanding of archaeological and architectural
heritage, by facilitating the representation of information
and by increasing its memorization.
Keywords--Cartography,
video
games,
multimedia path, archaeological and architectural
heritage, learning, mental map.

1. Introduction
Maps possess a heuristic virtue. When maps become
research, their realization becomes a performance. By
drawing, by erasing, by associating words with lines, a
reflective tool takes shape. Traces of an individual
reasoning are preserved on a support, allowing the
reading and visualization of its own path.
Through the use of existing digital tools, the
research work consists of proposing a three-dimensional
map able to improve the acquirement of archaeological
and architectural knowledge.
Experiments in the communication of archaeological
and architectural heritage are increasing. Thanks to the
attractions of multimedia, namely interactivity and
multimodality, it seems that web sites and CD-ROMs
have the capacity to transmit heritage information to the
public. But ultimately they miss real cognitive or
educational purposes.

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.52

2. The map as a subjective representation
According to the definition available on the BNF
website (Bibliothèque nationale de France), the map can
be “a small scale representation of a space and an idea on
a flat surface; it testifies to the necessity to represent the
territory for utilitarian purposes and it can also become a
tool of knowledge1” [3]. The advantanges of such a map
1

"La représentation à échelle réduite d’un espace et
d’une intention sur une surface plane, la carte témoigne
de la nécessité pour l'homme de représenter le territoire à
des fins utilitaires, elle peut se faire aussi instrument de
connaissance et outil de savoir".

75

trees occupy now more space than the Sierra Nevada2 »
[6].
The choices of the cartographer to realize his map
will depend on his sensitivity: he can for example, decide
to represent the experiences of a place (Figure 3),
transposing the physical reality of the place into the
imagination.

can then be multiple: knowledge, representation, control,
action, imagination, etc.
The map game “Jeu de cartes” (Figure 1), allows us,
like a cartographer, to imagine a territory by collecting
elements resulting from ancient maps.

Figure 1 “Jeu de cartes” : map game on the BNF
website

Figure 3 Picture representing the experiences of
the place [7]

According to Philippe Rekacewicz, cartography is
governed by both science, “with quantitative and
qualitative data”, art, as “a work consisting of
movements, colours and shapes”, but also “lie and
manipulation” [4]. The cartographer is a scientist, an
artist or a liar, or all three at once, because he is free to
show the territory in his own way.
Map is initially thought of as a picture, on which
selected elements are assembled in harmony. The author
then decides about their representation. Some elements
are reinforced, while others are hidden. The map
becomes the personal expression of its author. The poster
History of Life on Earth (Figure 2) is considered first as
an artwork. The final result demonstrates real aesthetic
research to reflect the evolution of life on earth.

The school Fustel de Coulanges [8], in Strasbourg,
suggested to its art students, an exercise with the school
journey as the topic (Figure 4). Although the journey is
the same for all the students, the diversity of work shows
that walking in the city solicits the senses and the
emotions of the passer-by. The picture is an individual
perception of a daily itinerary.

Figure 4 Drawing a school journey
The sensitive approach of cartography shows that
the perception of a world, a territory, a space or an
itinerary, is subjective. In the same way, we can
approach multimedia to demonstrate their capacity of
adaptation of the user.

Figure 2 “History of Life on Earth" [5]
In Terre des hommes (Land of men), the aviator
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry only mentioned on his map
the elements helpful for his survival : « Guillaumet […]
didn’t speak to me about Guadix, but of the three orange
trees which border a field near Guadix : « don't trust
them, mark them on your map… ». And the three orange

2

"Guillaumet […] ne me parlait pas de Guadix, mais des
trois orangers qui, près de Guadix, bordent un champ :
“Méfie-toi d’eux, marque-les sur ta carte...” Et les trois
orangers y tenaient désormais plus de place que la Sierra
Nevada".

76

making notes on paper (Figure 5). He can then create a
story in its own way, by thinking and structuring acts.

3. Video games subserve perception and
representation
3.1. Video games as learning systems
Since the beginning of the first electronic games in
the 1980’s, researchers have attempted to analyze the
relationship between video games and education, while
questioning the knowledge they transmit in an informal
and unconscious way.
Among them, Patricia Marks Greenfield wonders
what the effects are that video games have on the way of
thinking and perceiving things. In this sense, video
games would shape the cognitive process, which has a
universal aspect, arriving at the expression “cognitive
socialization” [9]. Apart from the fact that they
encourage the command of complex systems and
develop research skills through induction, video games
strengthen the capacity to interpret flat and static images
in three dimensions, as well as improve the necessary
abilities to transform, manipulate and mentally connect
dynamic and changing images. The mechanism
consisting of mentally connecting successive different
screens enables Patricia Marks Greenfield to introduce
the notion of the “mental map” [10] of the player. This
ability is reinforced by television and cinema that do not
show the entire space at once, but bits at a time. The user
then makes a spatial assembly that consists of mentally
gathering all the bits to rebuild space.

Figure 5 Riven player's annotations [13]

3.3. Video games as artworks
The video game narration is an expression firstly of
the game designer, creating ludic mechanisms, and
secondly of the player, creating his own story. The
scenaristic structure in which the player evolves is
perceived by the latter as a device giving sense to his
actions. This device establishes the intelligible
framework giving cognitive and practical tools for
creating. According to Jacques Henriot, no structure is in
itself and by itself ludic: “what makes the toy is the game
of the player” [14].
In his essay, Eddy Leja speaks about an artistic
expression specific to video games: “having seen that
certain game designers are artists, we must ask ourselves
if they are the only persons directly concerned by video
games who are capable of creation and expression? I
shall term “ludo-artistic expression” this expression
specific to video games, which is the privilege of the
player and not the designer” [15]. Leja defines the game
designer and the player as artists and he suggests that the
videoludic expression is not an individual action.

3.2. Video games as signs systems
Video games incite the exchange of “multimedia”
codes: visual, sound, and sometimes more: vibrations,
etc. How to approach the semeiological reading of these
universes?
Regarding our relation with signs, Christian
Vandendorpe notices similarities in the cognitive
mechanisms while reading a story or playing a video
game: “it seems that Riven [11] can be considered as a
pseudo-text, because its reading requires activities of
concatenation, recall and selection. This reading uses
skills of observation, deduction, abduction and Problemsolving. The word "reading" is used here in the sense of
connecting data collected by sight and submitting them
to interpretation3” [12]. In the video game, interpretation
is a common practice. The player interprets the various
messages (in many forms), which are placed in his path.
Exploration and clues discovery, sometimes require

4. Proposal hypothesis
The reconstruction project for the Vianden Castle
(Luxembourg), having a pedagogical aim, is a support to
this work.
Considering the ludic mechanisms and strategic
aspects, the learner will be able to develop a total and
intuitive understanding of the Vianden Castle.

3

" Il apparaît que Riven peut être considéré comme un
pseudo-texte, car sa lecture exige des activités de
concaténation, de rappel et de sélection. Sur un plan
transversal, cette lecture met plus précisément en jeu des
habilités d’observation, de déduction, d’abduction et de
résolution de problème. […] Le mot « lecture » est ici
employé au sens de mise en relation de données
recueillies par la vue et soumises à interprétation".

4.1. Materializing the mental map
We refer of the notion of “mental map” described
above, while reinterpreting it. Our approach consists of
materialising these maps. The mental map of the learner
becomes a real three-dimensional map encouraging him
to adopt a ludic attitude:
• The map is used as a guidance and locating tool,

77

of the world. We refer, on the one hand, to the
constructivist hypothesis according to which the learning
is an active and constructive process and, on the other
hand, to cartography, which has multiple stakes.

•

The latter allows the user to represent and
organize ideas,
• And to assist the memorization process of
knowledge.
In order to have an idea of the Vianden Castle, the
learner has the possibility of gathering and interpreting
different points of view during his real time movement
(Figure 6).

Figure 6 Screenshots on the path in the Vianden
Castle
Figure 8 Example of annotated screenshot

3D connections are possible between the pages. The
3D links can report waypoints in the castle for example,
or link clues (Figures 7).

The map is not the exact image of the castle, but
rather the learner’s representation or perception. The
important thing for the user, and for his individual
fantasy, is to make sense of what he perceives. From a
semio-cognitive point of view, the map establishes the
sensitive framework, encouraging the ludic attitude of
the user.
The three-dimensional map preserves the traces and
the risks of the path.

Conclusions
Figure 7 Screenshot-gathering to create a threedimensional map

Cartography and video games are malleable and
hybrid forms, because they support representation,
creation, diversion and learning.
By taking into account the cognitive capacities of
the learner, by recomposing some concepts related to
video games, and by materializing the mental map
described by Patricia Marks Greenfield, this work
proposes a new solution for integrating archaeological
and architectural knowledge.
Realization of a 3D map allows the learner to create
new writing and reading modalities, and to borrow signs
from various disciplines.
But how can we be sure that the message of the
designer is understood by the learner?
To conceive an efficient learning system, it’s then
necessary to define specific rules, and this from the
beginning of the conception. For example, the learner
progresses through a narrative structure based on riddles.

Visual or sonorous information is reproduced on the
bi-dimensional pages (Figure 8). The learner can search
documents from Internet. Sensitive areas allow round
trips between the three-dimensional map and the
Vianden Castle.
Throughout the creation of this map, the learner
outlines his path. For that, he must be able to detect
relevant elements in the castle, and to use a threedimensional map to make useful conclusions and debrief
his path and his deductions: locate, sketch, formulate a
hypothesis, give prominence to points of view, correct,
etc.
The map becomes a travel journal, identical to the
stories illustrated in the travels of explorers, themselves
in the pursuit of knowledge.
The data and the connections the user chooses to the
screenshots, allows him to create his own representation

78

[9]

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

Perriault Jacques. Communication at the symposium :
Pour ne plus avoir peur des jeux vidéo. March, 1998.
Perriault Jacques. L’acquisition et la construction de
connaissances par les jeux informatisés. In Réseaux, n°
67. CNET, Paris, September-October, 1994.
Cartes
et
territoire[s].
url :
http://www.archives.cg54.fr/JeuCadre3ExposVirt.htm
Rekacewicz Philippe. La cartographie, entre science, art
et manipulation. In Le monde diplomatique. 2006.
Finn Brian. History of life on hearth. Iapetus Press, 2006.
Saint Exupéry Antoine. Terre des hommes. Gallimard,
Paris, 1972.
Ma
carte
de
l'Europe.
url:
http://jaunepapillon.blogspot.com/2007/05/ma-carte-deleurope.html
Fustel
de
Coulanges.
url:
http://sirius.acstrasbourg.fr/microsites/hist_geo01/sig-stg/intro.htm

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

79

Greenfield Patricia M. Video games as tools for
cognitive socialization. In Computers, Cognition, and
Epistemology. An International Symposium, Sandbjerg
Slot, Danemark, April, 1987.
Greenfield Patricia M. Video games as cultural artefacts.
Journal of Applied developmental Psychology. Vol. 15,
n° 1, January-March. 1994.
Riven: the Sequel to Myst. Cyan Worlds Inc, Broderbund
Inc, 1997.
Vandendorpe Christian. La lecture de l’énigme. Alsic,
vol.1,
n°2.
url:
http://alsic.ustrasbg.fr/Num2/vanden/alsic_n02-rec2.htm.
Dlugosz Chris. url: http://chrisdlugosz.net/misc.shtml
Henriot Jacques. Sous couleur de jouer. José Corti, Paris,
1989.
Leja Eddy. Le jeu vidéo est-il un art ? url :
http://www.jiraf.org

