12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Comparing Information Visualization Tools Focusing on the Temporal Dimensions
Eva Wohlfart1
Wolfgang Aigner , Alessio Bertone2 , Silvia Miksch2
2

1

2

Vienna University of Technology, Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems (ISIS), Favoritenstrasse
9-11 / 188, A-1040 Vienna, Austria
Danube University Krems, Department of Information and Knowledge Engineering (ike), Dr.-Karl-Dorrek-Strasse
30, A-3500 Krems, Austria

Abstract

point out possible improvements that should be considered in designing such a categorization.

Empirical comparisons and categorizations of information visualization tools lack important considerations: the
former undervalue the need for a theoretical background,
and the latter tend to have too much distance from the user
because they do not consider definite user tasks. Therefore, our work combines these approaches and presents the
results of both a qualitative evaluation and a recently published categorization. We focus on the visualization of temporal data and reveal that current tools realize only a small
part of the visualization possibilities in this field.

• by combining a categorization and user tasks we give
a detailed overview of the features and shortcomings
of current InfoVis tools.

2

Keywords—categorization, information visualization, evaluation, qualitative

1 Introduction
Time is an important data dimension with distinct characteristics that is common across many application domains. Approaches to display and interact with temporal
data range from linear timeline visualizations to novel ideas
employing visual metaphors. However, due to only a few
comparison studies available, it is quite cumbersome to assess and select Information Visualization (InfoVis) toolkits.
In this paper we use a recently published categorization [8]
and a set of user tasks to perform a detailed comparison of
several visualization tools, focusing on the temporal aspects
of data. We show that these aspects are rarely considered in
the design of visualization tools and their functions.
Empirical analyses of InfoVis tools use predeﬁned tasks
to assess their usability. Categorizations for InfoVis tools
evaluate them by assigning meaningful criteria. Both approaches have a limited view: the former undervalues the
need for a theoretical background, and the latter tends to
have too much distance from the user because they do not
consider deﬁnite user tasks. We overcome these problems
by combining both approaches and showing the overlapping results. Thus, we aim at an improved view of the examined tools, and contribute to the following aspects:
• we use a novel method to compare InfoVis tools: by
combining a theoretical categorization and a qualitative approach we enhance the quality of the comparison.
• we evaluate a recently published categorization and

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.104

Related Work

Considering the evaluation of InfoVis tools we perceive
two directions: empirical evaluations with statistical analysis and theoretical approaches which aim to ﬁnd a general
taxonomy. These taxonomies rarely address the speciﬁc
needs of temporal visualization, e.g. the relationships between temporal primitives. This illustrates the importance
of our work that combines both empirical and theoretical
approaches to yield an even profounder evaluation of a visualization tool. Related work that led to this concept is
presented next.
The temporal visualization framework presented by
Chittaro and Combi deﬁnes four aspects: time points, time
intervals, temporal relations and logical expressions [9].
Our work restructures these aspects by integrating them either in the categorization or in the task deﬁnition process.
The diﬀerentiation between time points and time intervals
is reﬂected in the ﬁrst criterium time of the categorization.
Furthermore, the low-level tasks in the practical work deal
with the sequence of measured values, which is similar to
the aspect of temporal relations.
Wiss and Carr [14] construct a classiﬁcation framework
considering three cognitive aspects: attention, abstraction
and aﬀordances. Visual features, like color or shape, help
directing the attention. Abstraction can be seen as information hiding to ease the perception of the visualization,
e.g., ﬁltering or grouping. The aﬀordances of a visual object are the cues it gives to show what can be done with
it, e.g., a button aﬀords pushing. These cognitive aspects
are considered in several parts of our work: the categorization analyses if dynamic concepts are used and judges the
level of abstraction. In the qualitative evaluation, ﬁltering
mechanisms and the visual representation are explored.
Some parallels to the employed categorization are found
in the taxonomy by Daassi, Nigay and Fauvet [10]. They
deﬁne four steps of the visualization process: time, point
of view on time, time space and point of view on the time
space. In the second step, point of view on time, the repre-

69

sentation of the time values is chosen, e.g., whether time is
considered linear or cyclic. This step is reflected in the categorization criterion time that considers the structure of time.
At the third step, time space, the time values are mapped to
a visualization, correspondent to the representation criterion.
The task definition process was guided by existing empirical approaches. In general, the composition of user task
sets follows common rules: single and multiple variable
ranges are covered, and relationships between the attributes
have to be discovered [12], [13]. More advanced tasks consider the comparison of multiple criteria and the detection
of trends.

The time axis can be made up of time points or intervals. The structure of the time axis can be linear, cyclic or
branching. Considering the criterion data, it distinguishes
spatial and abstract data with no inherent spatial structure.
It makes a diﬀerence if each temporal primitive is associated with a single data value (univariate data) or if multiple
values have to be considered. Visualizing the raw data is
useful in many scenarios, but complex data sets require
data abstractions tailored to the user’s needs. Static representations show still images of points in time. Dynamic
representations use the physical dimension time to visualize the information. The presentation space itself can be 2or 3-dimensional.

3

3.3

Comparison Setting

Task Selection

For the practical part, a data set containing pollution
data measured in Great Britain was used [6]. We enhance
the task categorization provided by Alan M. Eachren [11]
and divide the user tasks into two categories: basic tasks
handling only one or two variables at a time and advanced
tasks dealing with more complex problems, like the determination of trends. Thereby, we achieve a controlled
qualitative evaluation that still focuses on the needs in real
life. In the following, a list of the defined tasks is shown.
Table 1 shows the connection of the defined tasks and the
categorization.

Before evaluating the InfoVis tools, some aspects had
to be taken into consideration. The adequate tools and the
best suiting categorization had to be chosen. Also, a set of
tasks had to be found that corresponds as much as possible
to real-life visualization requirements. The following sections describe these parameters.

3.1 Tool Selection
In this work, we focus on two-dimensional InfoVis tools
to increase the meaningfulness of the evaluation because
of their direct comparability. Furthermore, tools adopting
a third dimension often appear more complicated to the
user and are therefore used less. The three-dimensional
tool cviz [2] was not compared to the others because the
data import did not work and the contacted support did not
answer. We selected the four tools Spotfire 2.0 [4], Tableau
3.0 [5], Xmdv Tool 7.0 [7] and ILOG Discovery Preview
Version [3] to provide a profound overview of the currently
available InfoVis tools. They use a linear structure for
the visualization. We did not choose InfoVis tools using
other temporal structures because they are only available
for specialized tasks and not for any desired data. Tableau,
Spotfire and ILOG Discovery are produced and promoted
by a corporation, whereas the Xmdv Tool is distributed
free-of-charge and developed by persons all over the world.

Basic Tasks
Which temporal range is covered by the Ozone measurements in Plymouth?
Was a value of 3 of Nitric Oxide ever measured together
with a value of 27 of Nitrogen Dioxide?
Which year had the highest ozone pollution in London?
How much did the Sulphur Dioxide pollution change between January and July 2003?
Advanced Tasks
Are there pollutants having high values at specific seasons?

3.2 Categorization

Are there any correlations between pollutants?

In our work we aim at a detailed comparison of InfoVis
tools visualizing temporal data. A lot of categorizations
have been published that deal with InfoVis tools, but only
a few of them focus on time-dependent data. We are confident that the degree of adaption to the type of data influences the quality of the categorization. Therefore, we chose
the categorization by Aigner et al. [8] that builds upon three
criteria: time, data and representation. Moreover, a lot of
ideas that are mentioned in related research are considered
in it. In the following, we present the parts of the categorization in detail.

Has the general pollution increased in the last five years?

3.4

Qualitative Evaluation

The previously defined tasks were accomplished by a visualization expert with every tool and the results compared.
The following paragraph describes the accomplishment of
two example tasks.
One of the basic tasks dealt with the co-occurence of
two events: ”Was a value of 3 of Nitric Oxide ever measured together with a value of 27 of Nitrogen Dioxide?”

70

Task
Which temporal range is covered by the Ozone measurements in Plymouth?
Was a value of 3 of Nitric Oxide ever measured together
with a value of 27 of Nitrogen Dioxide?
Which year had the highest Ozone pollution in London?
How much did the Sulphur Dioxide pollution
change between January and July 2003?
Are there pollutants having high values at specific seasons?
Are there any correlations between pollutants?
Has the general pollution increased in the last five years?

Lev. of Abstraction
Data
Abstract
x

# Variables
Univ. Multiv.
x

x

x

x
x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

Temp. Prim.
Points Interval
x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x
x

Table 1: Connection of Categorization and User Tasks. Our work combines both a categorization and a set of user tasks.
The table shows the user tasks and their corresponding categorization categories, which are important for accomplishing
the task themselves
results were produced because a filter limited the data range
but the user had to scroll to see the setting of this filter. But
Spotfire oﬀers slightly more functions than Tableau, e.g.,
more aggregation functions and diﬀerent kinds of filters.
ILOG Discovery and the Xmdv Tool provide several visualizations for the display of data. The user chooses the
visualization he/she wants to use and works with it. Simple
interaction mechanisms are oﬀered as well, range filters by
ILOG Discovery and brushing by the Xmdv Tool. But the
facilities for changing the visualization, e.g. the color of
items, are relatively small compared to Tableau and Spotfire. ILOG Discovery had serious problems handling the
size of the data set, and the Xmdv Tool lacked the aggregation of variable values. Therefore, these tools give a first
overview of a data set, but for in-depth analysis other tools,
like Tableau or Spotfire, are more suitable.

With Tableau, the drag-and-drop technique and the socalled shelves (see also Figure 1) are used to display the
result: Tableau adjusts the time axes dynamically to show
the relevant data points. With the scatterplot in Spotfire, a
wrong result was retrieved first due to overlapping points.
Then the visualization was split to single days and the correct result was displayed. Using the Xmdv Tool, the user
brushes along the parallel coordinate axes to show the right
values. Because of the slowed down performance of ILOG
Discovery, this task was not carried out with this tool.
One of the advanced tasks was ”Has the general pollution increased in the last five years?”. Herein, the user has
to analyze the whole dataset and draw conclusions about
the general trend. Dragging the year, region and measure
values variables to the shelves of Tableau creates a bar visualization of the pollution over the last five years. It indicates that populous regions are most polluted, as London
and Birmingham in the southern center of Great Britain,
mostly due to high Ozone and Nitrogen Dioxide values.
Plymouth in the southwest is the least polluted city. A bar
visualization is used in Spotfire as well. The Xmdv tool
lacked aggregation functions to solve this task, and ILOG
Discovery’s performance problems also did not allow the
completion.

3.4.2

Handling of Temporal Information

ILOG Discovery and Xmdv Tool treated the data like any
other sequential input and positioned the data points along
an axis. Spotfire and Tableau recognize the date format
correctly and combined temporal values inside an interval
by a user-specified aggregation function. The control of
the granularity of the time axis is realized quite similar in
Tableau and Spotfire. Using Spotfire, the default granularity ”year” can be changed by clicking on the axis that represents the time. Tableau employs the well-known metaphor
of plus and minus signs used in directory trees to adjust the
temporal granularity. Figure 2 illustrates this concept.

3.4.1 Tool Overview
Summing up the experiences of the practical work our impression is that Spotfire and Tableau oﬀer more functions
than the other tools. The interaction process employed by
Tableau allows access to all important functions and is easily learned, because it is based on the drag-and-drop interface metaphor. Tableau’s user interface provides excellent
feedback about which visualization parameters are associated with the variables displayed. Spotfires implementation
of this aspect raised some problems: sometimes irritating

3.5

Categorization

After the practical part including some initial training
and the task accomplishment we apply the categorization
to the InfoVis tools. The tool features are collected and
summarized in Table 2.

71

Figure 1: Task Comparison. The three tools Xmdv Tool, Spotfire and Tableau show corresponding Nitric Oxide values of
3 and Nitrogen Dioxide values of 27. In this case, the correct result is ten times. (a) By brushing along the parallel coordinates visualization of the Xmdv Tool the matching points are revealed by red lines, as shown on the top left. The wrong
result of two lines may result in missing data points during import or overlapping data points. (b) Spotfire visualizes the
same task. In the small window, the matching points in time are displayed without splitting up the visualization to single
days. Therefore, only 7 points seem to meet the condition. After refining the visualization, the correct 10 points are shown.
(c) The two fields at the top of Tableau’s user interface, the so-called shelves, represent the variables visualized. The user
drags the variables there and the visualization is generated. Tableau then adjusts it to show only the relevant data points.
The user sees at first glance on which date and in which region a data point was measured.

72

3.5.1 Evaluation of the Categorization Scheme

Large data sets containing multiple variables and a lot of
data points pose a big problem to several of the examined
visualization tools, e.g., ILOG Discovery. For example,
the data set used in this work had more than 9000 lines
and caused problems ranging from slowed down user interaction to complete crash of the tool. However, Tableau
allowed the user to access these data by saving the project
after reading in the data and therefore using some kind of
caching.

The categorization gives a good overview to guide an initial
judgement of visualization tools. In general, the application
of the categorization was done without problems.
Considering the criterion level of abstraction, one has to
choose if a tool shows raw data or provides abstractions,
e.g. calculated aggregation values. Here the number and
character of abstraction methods available are important to
compare visualization tools adequately. Therefore, a further diﬀerentiation of this criterion would be an enhancement to the categorization.
The ability to interact with visualizations fundamentally
influences the users process of exploration. Interaction
methods essentially contribute to the usability of a tool.
Thus, the addition of a fourth category considering the factor interaction would improve the categorization as well.

3.7

Possible Improvements of InfoVis Tools

The conversion of the data set to diﬀerent file formats
made the read-in quite cumbersome. Therefore, a standard
for formatting input files is needed, especially for the format of temporal data, which was recognized by only two
tools. The complying with such a standard would greatly
improve the input data handling.
Some of the examined tools had essential problems dealing with the size of the used data set. The judgement of a visualization tool not only includes the kinds of data and formats supported, but also its performance abilities. Therefore, it should either support real-life data without problems, as in the case of Tableau and Spotfire, or specify the
allowed data set size in their documentation if they do not
support large data sets.
Some of the above mentioned problems is solved by
the recently available Time Intelligence Solution (TIS) [1],
which supports the analysis of time-oriented data. On the
one hand, TIS uses a standard format as input format to
allow flexibility and reuse of diﬀerent operators and some
simple visualization methods. On the other hand, TIS is
able to handle a huge amount of input data with good performance, but needs to be improved for the visualization
and interaction capabilities.

Figure 2: Granularity Adjustment. Using Tableau, the user
adjusts the granularity of the time axis by clicking on plus
and minus signs at the left of the time interval icons. Figure (a) shows the shelves before splitting up to days. By
clicking on the plus sign of the month symbol the new icon
representing days is added to the shelf, as shown in Figure (b). The visualization’s detail is changed accordingly
to show the exact measured values of each day.

3.6 Results
All examined InfoVis tools consider time as a linear
dimension. This sequential view of time is reflected in
the common visualizations available: parallel coordinates,
scatter plots and simple bar or line plots.
Aggregation functions that enable the user to compare
collected data in diﬀerent intervals are the most common
support to ease the exploration of large data sets. The Xmdv
Tool does not have the possibility to aggregate data values but handles large data sets with hierarchical clustering:
cluttered visualizations are clarified by combining multiple
similar visualization elements to one element.
A smooth input process without any changes to the input file was not available for any of the examined tools.
The real-life data set used contained missing values which
caused errors during read-in. Some tools, namely the Xmdv
Tool and ILOG Discovery, were not able to recognize a
date format. Input file formats were quite diverse as well:
besides the common csv format, other proprietary formats
were demanded that required adding some lines to the beginning of the file.

4

Conclusions

The InfoVis tools compared have quite diﬀerent features
and allow more or less user interactions. Once the range of
functions increases, the simplicity and clarity of what can
be done and how becomes more and more important. The
structuring of user interfaces of InfoVis tools is definitely
an important field for further research.
The specific temporal information contained in the data
was correctly recognized by only two visualization tools.
This illustrates how rarely time-oriented data are considered when designing a visualization tool. Due to the
frequent relation of scientific data to the dimension time
awareness for the specific needs of temporal data has to be
raised.
All tools position temporal events along a linear axis.
Especially when dealing with large data sets functionalities
for the discovery of periodicity would eﬀectively improve
the usability. The adoption and implementation of periodic

73

Repres.
Data
Time

Categorization
Time
dependency
Dimensionality
Level of
Abstraction
#Variables

Frame of
Reference
Structure
of time
Temporal
Primitives

Tableau
Static

Spotfire
Static

ILOG Discovery
Static

2D

2D

2D

Xmdv Tool
Static,
Dynamic
2D

Data,
Abstract
Univariate,
Multivariate

Data,
Abstract
Univariate,
Multivariate

Data,
Abstract
Univariate,
Multivariate

Data,
Abstract
Univariate,
Multivariate

Abstract
Spatial
Linear

Abstract,
Spatial
Linear

Abstract

Abstract

Linear

Linear

Time points
Time intervals

Time points
Time intervals

Time points

Time points

Practical Counterpart
Static visualization
Use of animations
Two-dimensional
visualization
Raw data visualization
e.g., Aggregation functions
Display single variables
Show variables
in relation
Abstract/Spatial
data can be explored.
Linearly structured
visualization
Show single points
Visualize intervals

Table 2: Categorization. The most functions and features are clearly oﬀered by Spotfire and Tableau. They allow the display
of both time points and intervals and also display spatial information. All examined tools position temporal events along a
linear time axis and do not oﬀer any features that would help the user to discover branching or cyclic temporal structures.
Dynamic visualizations can be generated when using the Xmdv Tool.
[9] Luca Chittaro and Carlo Combi.Representation of
Temporal Intervals and Relations: Information Visualization Aspects and their Evaluation.In Proceedings of the Eigth International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning, pages 13–20. IEEE
Computer Society Press, 2001.

data seems to be generally underrepresented and remains as
a field for future research.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the program ”FITIT Visual Computing” of the Federal Ministry of Transport, Innovation and Technology, Austria. Project number: 813388. For more information about this work, see
the Master’s Thesis [15].

[10] Chaouki Daassi, Laurence Nigay, and MarieChristine Fauvet.A Taxonomy of Temporal Data
Visualization
Techniques.Information-InteractionIntelligence, 5:41–63, 2006.

References
All web references have been accessed on March 20th,
2008.

[11] Alan M. Eachren.How Maps Work: Representation,
Visualization, and Design.Guilford Press, 1995.

[1] Time Intelligence Solution, http://wiki.ximes.
com.

[12] Qing Li and Chris North.Empirical Comparison of
Dynamic Query Sliders and Brushing Histograms.In
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, pages 147–153. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2003.

[2] CViz,
http://www.alphaworks.ibm.com/
formula/CViz.
[3] ILOG
Discovery,
http://www2.ilog.com/
preview/Discovery/index.html.

[13] E. Morse and M. Lewis.Evaluating Visualizations:
Using a Taxonomic Guide.International Journal of
Human Computer Studies, 53:637–662, 2000.

[4] Spotfire,
http://www.tibco.com/software/
business intelligence/.

[14] Ulrika Wiss and David Carr.A Cognitive Classification Framework for 3-Dimensional Information Visualization.Technical report, Lulea University of Technology, 1998.

[5] Tableau, http://www.tableausoftware.com/.
[6] UK National Air Quality Archive,
//www.airquality.co.uk/archive/
data and statistics home.php.

http:

[15] Eva Wohlfart.A Detailed Comparison of Information Visualization Tools Using a Reference Data
Set.Master’s thesis, Technical University of Vienna,
2007.http://ieg.ifs.tuwien.ac.at/
projects/infovis-compare/.

[7] Xmdv Tool, http://davis.wpi.edu/xmdv/.
[8] Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Wolfgang
M¨uller, Heidrun Schumann, and Christian Tominski.Visualizing Time-Oriented Data - A Systematic
View.In Computers and Graphics, volume 31, pages
401–409. Elsevier, 2007.

74

