12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Encoded Cultural Heritage Knowledge in Australian Aboriginal Traditional Representation of Country
Theodor Wyeld
Swinburne University of Technology, Melb. Aust.
{twyeld@gmail.com}
For Bardon [2] an understanding of Australian
Aboriginal art is contingent upon the stories they contain.
More than this, they coalesce space, time, and the
Ancestors’ wanderings in a form that is navigable to
those who know its conventions. In this sense, they
manifest as cultural heritage survival maps also. The
conventions are localised but transferable and extensible
by agreement with adjacent clan societies. Western map
production, by comparison, eradicates signs of local,
contingent, social and individual production, gaining
power by rendering transparent any inherent indexicality.
Hence, at first appearance, it appears there may be little
or no overlap between Western conventionalised map
reading and Australian Aboriginal survival map
navigation. However, as Turnbull [1] points out, the
indexicality of the Australian Aboriginal survival map is
more about the transparency of the map reader’s own
cultural background to the conventions used than the
legibility of the symbols used per se. As such, this paper
brings together Bardon [2] and Turnbull’s [1]
understandings of the indexicality of the Australian
Aboriginal cultural heritage survival map to form a
theory of the cultural specificity of the conventions used
shedding new light on their role as storytelling
navigation aids.

Abstract
From tactile paintings in sand to acrylic on board,
Australian Aboriginal performative art can be thought of
as also cultural heritage survival maps. This paper
synthesises the two key authors’ work [1; 2] that address
this concept. In so doing, it sheds new light on
understandings of the indexicality of the Australian
Aboriginal cultural heritage survival map to form a
theory of the cultural specificity of the conventions used
and their role as storytelling navigation aids.
Keywords--Cultural
Heritage,
Cultural
Knowledge, Australian Aboriginal Art as Survival
Map.

1.0 Introduction
In the early 1970’s Geoffrey Bardon [2] was
instrumental in overseeing a transition in communication
technology where traditional Australian Aboriginal
graphic representation was transferred from sand
painting1 to acrylic on board. While sand painting is still
practiced, its acrylic on board form is now more widely
known. As a method for cultural heritage survival, these
paintings also function as journey maps. They render in
abstract form an eternal sense of land and supernature
making it at once both visible and tactile. David Turnbull
[1] has also studied these journey maps, claiming the
iconography contained are not just metaphors for land
masses but come together as complete theories of
landscapes. Moreover, he claims these maps, and maps
in general, contain metaphorical referents to embedded
cultural values, language, and the mindset of their
creators. In this sense, the Australian Aboriginal painting
can be seen both aesthetically and, more importantly as
part of a cultural heritage knowledge communication
technology.

2.1 Bardon on Sand Painting
Section 2 largely draws from Bardon’s [2; 3] work
with the Western Desert Aboriginal peoples of Papunya
Tula.
According to Bardon [2], sand painting has been
used as a traditional ceremonial or ritual form of story
telling by Australian Aboriginal peoples for millennia. It
relies on pictographic or hieroglyphic styles of
illustration, song and dance that resonates with the rich
stories they are telling. Their sand doodles include arcs,
circles, meandering spirals and tracks similar to those
found in ancient petroglyphs dated to 30,000 years. A
selected area of ground is prepared by clearing away any
debris and smoothing it. Coloured sands, ochres,
feathers, charcoal and other materials are used to depict
the story. The area is completely destroyed on
completion of the story-telling ceremony (much like the
Buddhist mandala) (see figure 1).

1

Sand painting is a performative art involving the
inscribing of petroglyph forms in sand accompanied by
dance and song. Its transition to acrylic on board is
clearly problematic, not least regarding what knowledge
could be depicted in its more permanent form.
Nevertheless, their maintenance role in the continuance
of the longest surviving cultural practice has been largely
retained.

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.83

439

to tell their story, meanings and origins become
subjective. The painting is ‘read’4 as a story about the
wanderings of the Totemic Ancestors through the
landscape. This demonstrates a transcendental reality of
spirit and world in the painting and the telling of its
story.

Figure 1. Western Desert sand painting [3,
pg101].
A number of anthropologists have tried to interpret
the language and meanings of their ephemeral works
over the years [4; 5; 6; 7; 8]. Including elaborate body
paintings, carved boards, and sand paintings, they
constitute 3-dimensional tactile forms2 of cultural
expression through an organised pictorial language.
Many are performative depictions of journeys through
the landscape. These landscapes are not seen from the
outside but from the inside as a continuous humanised
narrative. Different tribes and clans use different styles.
Some use symmetrical, formalised, linear designs while
others use more abstract flattened apparently randomised
designs. This reflects the rich and varied landscape of the
Australian continent. Their sand paintings are part of
their Dreaming ceremonies3. They can describe
particular places and events. The painter refers to their
painting as a kind of survival map which can be used for
navigation and information about places and natural
features.
The recent transference of sand painting to acrylic
on board has retained much of its prior meaning and
form. It retains also its haptic expression. Where Western
style painting is unquestionably a visual practice, the
Australian Aboriginal painter-storyteller will handle their
painting elucidating its hidden messages by running their
fingers over its various elements (see figure 2). The work
is thus revealed by this haptic approach. It also means it
is difficult for the Australian Aboriginal painter to copy
another painting by simply observing it. As the artist has

Figure 2. Western Desert Australian Aboriginal
artist ‘telling’ the story of his painting haptically
[2, pg129].
One is literally a ‘part’ of these paintings; virtually
walking around in it – not external to it, observing or
looking on. The paintings themselves rarely have any
particular orientation. They can be looked at from many
different angels and sides depending on one’s orientation
to what is depicted and their orientation to the story.
Indeed, the painting can be seen from all sides at once
and seen through like an x-ray image. The arbitrariness
of the painting’s edge means its relativity to the viewer is
absolute. It is this arbitrariness that denies the normal
certainness we associate with Western art. It stems from
its origins in the sand-mosaic5. Unlike the Western style,
the Australian Aboriginal artist enters, rather than is
opposed or external to, the world. Moreover, interaction
with the surface of the painting, as a creative principle,
can be seen as a form of grammar: the hieroglyph as
noun; colours, intensifications, stresses and clarifications
as adjective or adverb; and their reconstitution in space
as the verb.

2.2 As Maps without Temporal Direction

2

As ‘art works’ they may also contain secret sacred
motifs that are not meant to be seen by all.
3
The dreaming refers to a time when the ancient
Totemic Ancestors wandered the landscape giving its
places their names and leaving tracks forming the rivers
and valleys. It transcends the present and the landscapes
it inhabits. There is an ongoing belief that the Ancestors
are inextricably linked to the fate of the contemporary
Australian Aboriginal person, thus the compelling need
to maintain their culture through performative
storytelling.

With the transition from sand-mosaic painting to
acrylic on board, the once ephemeral/transient images
were given permanence. With it the stories could be
preserved and interpreted by others not having access to
the original ceremonial sand constructions. But, this also
4

Not in a literal sense, but as a cognitive act of
understanding.
5
and body-painting.

440

means the new form changes the way the stores could be
told. In the original form, space was continually
expanded upon by the infinity of the sand to transform.
Now the frame of the painting itself became a metaphor
for the perimeter of the space beyond. On the other hand,
the land that is re-presented in the painting has distinct
form and has an eternal life force which transcends space
and time. In a sense, floating above the land, seeing it
from all positions at once, the Totemic Ancestors
depicted in the painting are temporally manifest in the
land surface itself. In an eternal present, this is beyond
any Western notion of the metric progression of time.
The European artists Delaunay, Kandinsky, and
Klee understood this relativism of perception and that
temporality is within ourselves. In the Australian
Aboriginal paintings,
the images do not provide a mere graphic equivalent
of spoken words, thereby attaching themselves to the
temporality implicit in the ordinary syntax of a
sentence. Quite to the contrary, and importantly:
time has become space. There is no conventional
sequentiality in the ‘stories’, but rather the accretion
of space or ‘place’. Since the space or ‘place’ is
only the retelling of story already known to the
painter, the so-called ‘story’ is an eternal idea in the
culture of the painter. The elements or images of the
story therefore have no reading direction as we
understand it [2, p134].

As pre-eminently a symbolic way of reducing all
understanding to space, space and time are intertwined.
Bardon [2] claims, this four-dimensional simultaneity
can be seen in Clifford Possum’s (1992) painting, Ngarlu
Love Story (see figure 3 & 4). It looks like one is looking
at their feet but also looking at themselves looking at
their feet from above the clouds. One is depicted coming
towards the fireplace as well as seeing themselves
approaching it. The same place in space is perceived of
at the same time but also at many moments in time and is
revisited through its telling.

Figure 4. Anotation of Ngarlu Love Story.

3.1 Turnbull on Survival Maps
Section 3 largely draws on Turnbull’s (first
published in 1989) series Imagining Nature.
The telling and retelling of stories recounts journeys
through time and space. In this sense, according to
Turnbull [1], Australian Aboriginal paintings can be
thought of as navigable survival maps – for the survival
and transmission of their cultural heritage. However,
they do not resemble the objective navigational maps
more familiar in the West. Yet, like Western maps, they
are indexical. That is, they are rarely understood outside
the specificities of the culture that created them.
All maps have this conventional, selective,
indexical, and embedding of the culture from whence
they came. They are dependent on the understanding of
particular cognitive reasonings peculiar to that culture,
that can be learned. At their base is a metaphor for the
demonstration of knowledge. More than this, as most of
our experiences of our environments are in some way
mediated (if only by cultural familiarity6), our
understanding of our environments is constituted by a

Figure 3. Ngarlu Love Story, Clifford Possum,
Tjapaltjarri (Acrylic on canvas, 143x100cm,
1992). The painting depicts a story of forbidden
love between a Tjapaltjarri man Liltipililti and a
Napangati woman. Liltipililti (shown as a large
U-shape) spun hair string on a spindle or
‘wirrakurru’ singing a sacred love song to draw
a Napangati woman to the campsite. As the
Napangati woman approached, Liltipililti lost
concentration and clumps of unspun hair were
blown away. These events are glimpsed through
a cloudy overlay.

6

See Gombrich’s [9, p84] comparative study of how a
Chinese artist interprets the English countryside through
the prism of their prior environmental understandings
depicted in accordance with their own peculiar
iconography, with the English painter’s interpretation of
the same environment.

Unlike the European landscape painting with its
horizon separating land and sky, in the Australian
Aboriginal painting these two are united as one.

441

dialectic interaction between its various nodes (visual,
cognitive, memory markers) of importance to us. Hence,
experience and representation are formative of each other
and only separable when we attempt to diagrammatically
analyse space [see 10]. Hence, the map becomes the
territory. Although, the territory can never be the map, as
it is only in the symbolism of the diagrammatic map that
we take possession of the territory [11]. Thus, all maps
have local, contingent and indexical character intimately
tied to human purpose and action. In this sense,
Australian Aboriginal survival maps can serve a similar
purpose to the Western norm.
Turnbull [1] uses the example of the Crocodile
Totem as a topographic map. In figure 5 a crocodile is
clearly depicted. The crocodile – the totem for the region
referred to – can be seen to map the area in a
conventional sense (see figure 6). We can extend
Turnbull’s notion by literally overlaying the crocodile’s
form on a conventional map of the region referred to.
The legs straddle the opening of the river mouth and the
extent of the land either side is represented by the
animal’s body (see figure 7). Despite doing this, the
crocodile painting is still a highly conventionalised map,
in that one needs to be learned on its conventions to be
able to read it in the ways it is meant to be read. For, it
also contains other sociological knowledge. For example,
the diamond pattern is symbolic of the flickering flames
representative of knowledge in general: the red diamonds
flames, ashes yellow, sparks white dots, charcoal black
lines, flaming coals white with red lines, dust white lines
on yellow – all combining to manifest knowledge in
different ways (see figure 5). The crocodile itself is used
to teach the children of the ancestor’s presence and that
if they do not treat this place with respect the crocodile
ancestor will retaliate – literally and metaphorically.
The indexicality of Australian Aboriginal survival
maps cannot thus be simply equated with their
practicality. Although, a stranger to Australian
Aboriginal culture is able to read their map language
with training. Hence, claims that a map, such as an
Australian Aboriginal map, is more indexical than a
European map is more about the transparency of the map
reader’s own cultural background to the conventions
used than the legibility of the symbols used per se.
Australian Aboriginal maps are only fully
understood by those who have been initiated to the
knowledge necessary. For that reading, there will always
be some knowledge that is undecipherable reserved only
for those fully initiated. European maps, on the other
hand give the appearance of being completely open to an
external coordinate system supposedly outside its own
culture. In this case,
one could argue that, in Western society, knowledge
gains its power through denying, or rendering
transparent, the inherent indexicality of all
statements or knowledge claims. In the Western
tradition the way to imbue a claim with authority is
to attempt to eradicate all signs of its local,
contingent, social and individual production.
Australian Aborigines, on the other hand, ensure

that only the initiated can go beyond the surface
appearance of local contingency [1, p42].
While maps from different cultures may appear to be
distorted, conventional and totally indexical by the
regimented standards of the Western model, once
recognised as route maps, their workability becomes
apparent – just as workable as Beck’s abstracted map of
the London underground. In this sense, maps can have a
variety of functions imposed upon them beyond simple
route indicators. Hence, their latent symbolic values
reflect the society’s realities and values.

Figure 5. Crocodile Totem painting
[1, p32].

442

be learnt to be able to read them, spatial locations can be
ascertained once the basics are learned (see figure 8, 9 &
10).

Figure 8. Journey from Maranji Kapi to Tarle
Kunga using traditional mapping conventions
[1, p53].
Figure 6. Crocodile Totem painting as
conventional topographic map
[1, p32]

Figure 7. Overlay of Crocodile Totem map on
conventional Western map of the region.

Figure 9. Journey form Maranji Kapi to
TarleKunga using Western topological referents
[1, p53].

As an example, Turnbull [1] provides a clearer
journey map. Despite the difficulty in detecting clear
topographical features in an Australian Aboriginal map
and the large amount of esoteric knowledge required to

443

invariant (the Western, objective, ontologically certain,
position).
Therefore, while in the West objects are thought of
as having fixed characteristics, defined boundaries, and
position in a spatial coordinate system, it may simply be
that the Western ontology is reinforced by the role maps
play in Western culture. If the Western experience of the
world and representations of it are mutually
interdependent then they are inseparable. Hence, the map
is the territory. Beck’s London underground map is an
example of a map which distorts distances and
relationships to fit a particular schema, yet it is readable
by non-Londoners once they know its conventions. It
follows then that, all maps are indexical, as no map,
representation, diagram, equation, theory and so on, can
be completely independent of the culture that created it.
Indexical statements rely on their context for their truth.
Australian Aboriginal paintings are recognisable as
describing places and events, but the information they
contain can only be understood within the cultural
specificities of the circumstance that the stories they
contain are told. They cannot be generalised beyond this.
But, while we can think of some Australian Aboriginal
paintings as maps they cannot be compared to their
European counterparts. However, despite not having a
grid or standardised metric they can still be used as
navigational devices (as evidenced by the Crocodile
Totem painting and journey to Tarle Kunga). Rather than
describing places in a static sense, they describe events
that have occurred in place (such as in Ngarlu Love
Story). Indeed, due to their intertwining of space and
time in a four-dimensional simultaneity, not present in
conventional Western maps7, they can also be used to
recount journeys across unknown lands8.
Not all Australian Aboriginal paintings can be
thought of as maps. To what extent they can is open to
debate. Often the depictions contained represent what
might be called the ancestors footsteps through the land –
not literally footsteps but remnants of their presence
from the dreamtime. Each clan is responsible for its
Songline (a journey for which its story is told through

Figure 10. Although this is not the actual
journey to Tarle Kunga painting that Turnbull
refers to (unavailable due to public viewing
sensitivities), there are clear parallels in the
iconography [3, pg132].

3.2 Landscape as Map
If, according to Turnbull [1], maps, thought of as
metaphors, not just for land masses but as theories of
landscapes, contain metaphorical referents to embedded
cultural values, language, and the mindset of their
creators, and spatiality is fundamental to our
consciousness [12] and events are bound in space and
time through the logical relations of grammar and
metaphor in language, then Wittgenstein’s [13]
proposition that the limits of one’s language is the limit
of their world holds. We can go further and add that the
limits to one’s language is determined by their spatial
consciousness and that these are interrelated. Hence,
space is fundamental in ordering our knowledge and
experience.
It is not surprising then that, while maps as spatial
metaphors for cultural knowledge is fundamental, the
relative location of objects in space is different for
different cultures. Moreover, how one culture goes about
representing spatiality and its meaning within the
specificities of their world view is not always easily
understood by others. Hence, natural objects and their
spatial relations are also a part of a culture’s world view,
episteme, cognitive schema, ontology, and may not be

7

This is distinct from diagrammatic representations of
past or future events, such as Minard’s graphic of
Napoleon’s 1812 march [see 14] which happens to use
also a map (or the reconstruction of JFK’s assassination:
as an annotated route map etc).
8
As narratives of journeys across the landscape, they
inculcate and invoke conventions through ceremonies
and rituals. Called Songlines, journeys of their Ancestral
Beings in the Dreamtime are recounted, criss-crossing
the country. Individuals only ‘know’ or have
responsibility for localised sections of a Songline. The
network is formed through exchange and negotiation in
the form of bark paintings or song cycles. The
conventions used, known only within the existent
cultural framework, means representations of unknown
lands can be added to local knowledge to form an
extended network. The ‘nodes’ and their locations are
embedded in the visitors’ ceremonial storytelling.

444

illustration, song and dance) which refers to the
dreaming when, through their socialising, the ancestors
left their ‘footprints’ and ‘tracks’ in the now known
landscape. It refers to the specific series of stories, songs,
dances and graphic representations about that creative
epoch as well as the Country it defines. More than this,
the Songlines or tracks form a network which constitutes
the political and economic processes of the surrounding
society.
The dreamtime transcends the present and the
landscapes it inhabits. As the ancestors in the form of
animals acquiesced with the landscape creating its
features they gave the world its forms, identities and
names. These features and the tracks connecting them
and their significances link all identifiable places into a
whole. As Australian Aboriginal knowledge is coincident
with the creative activity of the Ancestral Beings which
created the topography, providing the names for places
along the songline paths, and link groups of people, all
interact forming a cohesive knowledge network, hence
the map metaphor is appropriate. Constituted by their
spatial connectivity, knowledge and language coalesce in
these maps.
For the Australian Aborigine, knowledge is a
commodity to be earned, traded, and restricted. It is the
basis of the ceremonial power it imbues in ritual.
Through constant negotiation the knowledge is
maintained and shared. While the notion of a network is
essential to all cultural formations, the way it manifests
varies. For the Australian Aboriginal it is not simply the
naming of places (more common to the Eurocentric
view) but the interconnectedness of these places and the
meanings behind the names that count. This
interconnectedness takes a long time to learn and hence
much capital is invested in what knowledge each
individual is allowed to retain. More than this, the
network is tangible (it is embedded in a changing
landscape) and needs to be actively maintained.
Landscape is central to their storytelling. Places are
created by socialising the space, and events coalesce in
space and time in these places. This is most acute in the
performative recounting of ancestral, historical or
contemporary events. Hence, unlike the European
approach, which makes connections between places
using abstract metric qualities, for the Australian
Aboriginal, the tracks are the landscape. In this sense,
the Australian Aboriginal theory of land sees the
landscape as a map of itself [1].

With the transference from sand mosaic to acrylic on
board Australian Aboriginal paintings retain their role as
cultural heritage knowledge survival maps. Not
constituting a language as such, rather their indexicality
is contingent on understanding the conventions used.
Intertwining space and time, their lack of sequentiality
differentiates them from the Western map. Western
maps, by contrast, especially those that include time
scales (such as the Minard graphic), rely on a time metric
which has a clear direction vector. As navigable maps
their formative knowledge is embedded in the map
iconography. Western maps become the territory by
virtue of the transparency of their objective symbolism.
Whereas, Australian Aboriginal maps are more
subjective. In this sense, both present theories of
landscapes. For the Australian Aborigine the landscape is
a map of itself by virtue of the infinitude of the sand that
is transformed in the traditional map-making process
itself – now transferred to acrylic on board.
Both Bardon and Turnbull agree indexicality of any
map is a function of understanding the conventions used.
Australian Aboriginal maps can only be differentiated
from Western maps by the objective/subjective divide.
However, this is a cultural differentiation that only
presents itself when we attempt to compare them. Within
the frameworks of their own cultures this does not
present as a problem. Culturally, the West derives its
truths from the transparency of its indexicality, whereas,
for Australian Aboriginal culture, power is vested in the
apparent subjectivity of its indexicality, thus protecting
the knowledge contained by restricting its legibility to
only those initiated to its conventions. In terms of
cultural values, it could be said that this reflects the main
cultural differentiation between the Australian
Aboriginal and the West – spirituality and materiality
respectively. For the West, maps provide objective,
concrete, information about topographic forms, places
and events in a quantifiable time scale. For the
Australian Aborigine, their survival maps are more
ephemeral. Not conforming to any strict time scale, they
manifest events and places through their performative
uttering into existence. However, with some training it is
possible for the uninitiated to retrace journeys between
distinct topographical features in a similar manner to the
way the Western map provides.
The value in addressing Bardon and Turnbull’s work
in this way has been to tie together the differing
approaches to the notion of Australian Aboriginal art as
survival map. Where Bardon focused on the stories
contained in their art as an aesthetic and cultural
function, Turnbull focused on a more literal reading.
Neither is particularly useful in isolation. Synthesised
here, we can see a new way of ‘reading’ the significance
of Australian Aboriginal art as not just survival map but
as cultural heritage archive of past and future journeys.
With no written language, Australian Aboriginal peoples
have relied, and continue to rely, on this highly
performative cultural mapping as a means for
communicating social meaning-making across the eons.

4. Discussion
Bardon [2] and Turnbull [1] set out to describe, in
their own ways, how Australian Aboriginal art can be
reinterpreted as a form of cultural heritage survival
mapping. Moreover, contained within the petroglyph
representations are navigable journey maps – journeys
through time and space without direction. This is very
different to how Western maps are perceived. However,
both can be used to navigate traversable landscapes. In
this sense, they can be said to share a common function.

445

5. Conclusion
With their transference from tactile sand paintings to
acrylic on board, this part of the role of Australian
Aboriginal performative art, that can be thought of as
cultural heritage survival mapping, continues. In
synthesising Bardon and Turnbull’s work in this field
new light has been shed on understandings of the
indexicality of the Australian Aboriginal cultural
heritage survival map to form a theory of the cultural
specificity of the conventions used and their role as
storytelling navigation aids. More specifically, landscape
as a map of itself and the profound significance of this in
the connection Australian Aboriginal people have with
the land expressed through their performative art.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

Turnbull, D., 1989, Maps are Territories: Science is an
Atlas, Deakin University Press.
Bardon, G., 1999, Papunya Tula: Art of the Western
Desert, J.B. Books Australia.
Bardon, G., and Bardon, J, 2004, Papunya: a place made
after the story, the Miegunyah Press, Australia.
Tindale N. B., 1974, Aboriginal tribes of Australia : their
terrain, environmental controls, distribution, limits, and
proper names, Australian National University Press,
Canberra.
Strehlow, T. G. H., 1958, Dark and White Australians,
Riall, Melb.
Berndt R. M. and Phillips E.S., 1978, The Australian
Aboriginal heritage: an introduction through the arts,
Ure Smith in association with the Australian Society for
Education through the Arts, Sydney.
Munn, N. D., 1973, Walbiri iconography: graphic
representation and cultural symbolism in a Central
Australian society, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New
York.
Mountford, C. P., 1970, The dreamtime: Australian
aboriginal myths in paintings, Rigby, Adelaide.
Gombrich, E. H., 2000, Art and Illusion: A Study in the
Psychology of Pictorial Representation, Princeton
University Press, Princeton and Oxford.
Lefebvre, H. 1991, The Production of Space, Blackwell,
Oxford UK & Cambridge USA.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F., 1987, A thousand plateaus:
capitalism and schizophrenia, Massumi, B., (trans.),
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Piaget, J., 1969, The Mechanisms of Perception,
Routledge & Kegan, London.
Wittgenstein, L., 1980, Culture and Value, Winch, P.
(trans.), B. Blackwell, Oxford.
Tufte, E. R., 1983, The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, Graphics Press, Cheshire, Connecticut.

446

