12th International Conference Information Visualisation

113 Years of Physical Review: Using Flow Maps to Show
Temporal and Topical Citation Patterns
Bruce W. Herr II, Russell J. Duhon, Katy Börner, Elisha F. Hardy, Shashikant Penumarthy
Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science Center
School of Library and Information Science, Indiana University Bloomington, IN, USA
{bherr, rduhon, katy, efhardy, sprao}@indiana.edu
each year based on citation counts, high-impact papers,
and discoveries or themes worthy of special recognition.
Correct predictions by Thomson Scientific are indicated
by larger medals.

Abstract

We visualize 113 years of bibliographic data from the
American Physical Society. The 389,899 documents are
laid out in a two dimensional time-topic reference
system. The citations from 2005 papers are overlaid as
flow maps from each topic to the papers referenced by
papers in the topic making intercitation patterns between
topic areas visible. Paper locations of Nobel Prize
predictions and winners are marked. Finally, though not
possible to reproduce here, the visualization was
rendered to, and is best viewed on, a 24” x 30” canvas
at 300 dots per inch (DPI).

2. Data
The Physical Review dataset was provided by the
American Physical Society (APS). It comprises optical
character recognition (OCR) of the full text, markup
SGML/XML of the full text, and bibliographic metadata
in XML format for 398,005 papers.
XSLT was used to parse the many files that reported
the bibliographic metadata in XML format. Among
others, it provides a unique Digital Object Identifier
(DOI) for each paper; a listing of its authors; date(s)
when the paper was received, revised, corrected and
published; code(s) from the Physics and Astronomy
Classification Scheme (PACS) [1, 2] and citation
references.

Keywords---network analysis, domain visualization,
physical review

1. Introduction
This is the very first map of a 113-year scholarly
dataset that captures the structure and evolution of an
entire field: Physics. The visualization aggregates
389,899 papers published in 720 volumes of 11 journals
between 1893 and 2005. Time runs horizontally. PACS
codes run vertically and are labeled from ‘00-General’ to
‘09-Geophysics, Astronomy and Astrophysics’ on the
right.

PACS codes have been in use since 1975. They are
assigned by the author in consultation with reviewers and
editors. The average number of PACS codes per paper
since then is about 1.5. There is no ‘main’ PACS code
for a paper.

The 91,762 papers published from 1893 to 1976 take
up the left third of the map. In 1977, the Physical Review
introduced the Physics and Astronomy Classification
Scheme (PACS) codes, and the visualization subdivides
vertically into the top-level PACS codes. The 217,503
papers from 1977 to 2000, for which references but no
citation data is available, occupy the middle third on the
map. The 80,634 papers from 2001 to 2005, for which
citation data is available, fill the right third of the map.

3. Technique
3.1 Reference System
How to layout 389,899 papers published over 113
years? Using the temporal and topical PACS
organization of papers, a simple, two-dimensional
reference system was used. Time runs from left to right,
the PACS codes increase from bottom to top with the
lowest line of bar graphs having no PACS codes
assigned. The first 83 years take up the left third of the
page, the next 25 years each occupy about 1cm in the
middle third, and the last 5 years with about 20% of all
PhysRev publications are plotted in the right third of the
map.

Each ‘bar graph’ is subdivided vertically into the
journals that appear in it with height proportional to the
number of papers. The area for each journal is
subdivided horizontally into the volumes of the journal.
Overlaid on this two-dimensional base map are all
citations from every Physical Review paper published in
2005.
Small Nobel Prize medals are placed where the
prize-winning paper is located on the map. Thomson
Scientific predicts three Nobel Prize awardees in physics

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.97

The next question concerned the layout of papers
within each ‘PACS code by year’ box. The original idea
was to group papers published in the same year by

421

bibliographic coupling [3]. That is, the more references
two papers share the more similar they are. Hierarchical
agglomerative clustering would then be applied to
compute a partition of the paper set that has high within
cluster similarity and low between-cluster similarity.
Clusters would then be size coded by the number of
papers they contain and laid out using self organizing
maps [4] or a Dorling cartogram.

Metaphorically and visually, citation linkages might
resemble ‘blood vessels’ that interconnect and feed
different areas of science. The flow map layout [5]
captures this metaphor algorithmically, see also section 5
on ‘Related Work’. Papers were aggregated into journal
volumes and volumes clustered into a tree according to
their spatial arrangement. Lines are then drawn from the
root (top level PACS code) to each volume, remaining
merged into single lines until the bounding box for the
upcoming cluster is approached, then splitting into lines
proportional to the amounts that ‘flow’ to the respective
volumes of the cluster. For this map, the flow map layout
was independently applied to all 2005 citations from
each top-level PACS code into other Physical Review
papers. Spatially, each journal volume is represented by
a constructed node in the center of the area it covers on
the map.

However, a layout using circles was not space
efficient. Also, the same journals and volumes would be
positioned in different places of the 113 x 11 boxes.
Hence, we decided to group and display papers using
their natural ‘containers’: journals and journal volumes.
The space was divided into horizontal slices for each
journal proportional in height to the quantity of papers
from that journal containing that PACS. Those slices
were then subdivided into vertical slices for each volume
in that journal, proportional in width to the quantity of
papers from that volume containing that PACS.
Out of the 261,190 papers with PACS codes,
110,978 contain more than one top-level PACS code.
They were placed in each of them, increasing the size of
the encompassing volume and contributing their citations
to the set of papers cited by that PACS, see Fig. 1 and
Fig. 2.

To overlay the Nobel laureate winners whose Nobel
winning papers were published in Physical Review, the
winning papers were crosschecked with the Physical
Review database. If the Nobel winning papers were
found, then a Nobel icon was placed where the paper
belongs on the base map determined by looking at its
year, PACS code, and journal. If the Nobel’s paper was
predicted by Thomson ISI, then a larger Nobel icon was
used, see Fig. 1.
With the final reference system and data overlays,
the growth and decline of the number of papers in
different PACS codes and journals can be seen. The
number and density of the overlaid 2005 citation links
shows that physics draws extensively on old and new
knowledge and from different areas of physics.

4. Interpretation
The first and most obvious pattern illustrated by this
map is the huge growth in physics papers in Physical
Review over time. The relative amounts of publications
in the various PACS codes are also evident. Somewhat
more subtly, the relative frequencies of papers from
different journals in each PACS over time can be seen,
because within each PACS the papers are organized and
aggregated by the volume and colored by the journal.

Figure 1 Reference system close-up

3.2 Data Overlays
The different journals are color coded, and they
always appear in the same sequence, improving the
readability of the map considerably. As mentioned
previously, the height of each journal bar corresponds to
the number of its papers published in this year. Journal
volume subdivisions reflect the percentages of papers
published in them.

Citation patterns appear to span the whole history of
the Physical Review and cross all disciplinary boundaries
within physics – at least for 2005 paper citations. Very
few volumes are not cited by papers published in 2005.
Also, many lines converge at almost all volumes
indicating that many different papers cite a paper in these
volumes.

Interested to show the cross-fertilization of different
areas of research, we tried to find a way to show the
citation linkages among the 389,899 papers. For 2005
alone, there are 958,913 citation linkages including DOIs
from 42,516 papers published in 2005 to 145,665 papers
within the PhysRev dataset and to 176,473 outside the
set. Aggregated at the level of journal volumes, there are
17,343 tendrils from ten top-level PACS codes in 2005
to 2,691 volumes.

Inter-PACS cross-citation can be seen. Specifically,
PACS 8 -- the ‘interdisciplinary category’ -- as expected
cites heavily in other PACS codes. This can be seen by
looking at the bright line arching downwards, as it is near

422

Figure 2 113 Years of Physical Review
Minard’s maps showing the approximate amount of
cotton imports by Europe in 1864 [7] is shown in Fig. 3.

the top of the map. Somewhat more interestingly, a large
segment of citations from the ‘general’ PACS code 0 go
to PACS 3 representing research in ‘atomic and
molecular physics’.
The map also highlights that most recent Nobel
Prizes have been awarded for work from a period when
physics was a relatively small field. Today, the Nobel
Prize committee must increasingly choose between
works spanning a field many times the size it was just
twenty five years ago.

5. Related Work
Movement maps or flow maps help communicate
the movement of tangible objects, e.g., people, bank
notes, goods, in geographical space but also of intangible
objects, e.g., energy, ideas, or reputation, in digital
spaces [6]. In 113 Years of Physical Review they are used
to show the flow of knowledge via citation linkages.
Some of the first flow maps were drawn by hand by
Harness, Belpaire, and Minard. A close-up of one of

Figure 3 Minard’s 1864 flow map of cotton brut
imports

423

Flow maps are generated from tables that represent
the amount of flow occurring between pairs of places,
e.g., migration tables produced by the US Bureau of the
Census. Typically, the largest amount of movement is
between spatially close places modulated by the size of
the places. The amount of traffic follows a power law,
i.e., there are few pairs of places that have enormous
traffic and many pairs with rather little traffic.
There are two types of flow maps: continuous and
discrete. Continuous flow maps use vector fields or
streamlines to show continuous flow patterns. As an
example, the maps by Tobler given in Figures 4-7 show
estimated state to state net migration in US depicted as a
vector field with scalar potential, contour lines, and
estimated trajectories [8].

Figure 7 Migration potentials and streaklines
with the gradient vectors connected to form
streaklines.
Discrete flow maps use bands or arrows whose
width is proportional to the volume moved. One of the
first computer generated flow maps showed a
‘Cartographatron display of 9,931,000 desire line traces
of personal trips in Chicago’ and was published in 1959
[9].
In 1987, Tobler designed the Flow Mapper program.
An updated version is freely available via the Center for
Spatially Integrated Social Science [10]. The program
was used to generate the flow map of the 1995 – 2000
net migration shown in Fig. 8.

Figure 4 Gaining and losing states based on the
marginals of a 48 by 48 migration table.

Figure 8 Net migration, 1995 – 2000
It has also been used to map journal inter-citations
using data by Combs et al [11], see Fig. 9. In the latter,
both citation directions are shown using half arrows.

Figure 5 The pressure to move in US based on a
continuous spatial gravity model.

Figure 9 Journal inter-citations
The 113 Years of Physical Review map uses a Flow
Map Layout Algorithm developed and made freely
available by Phan and colleagues at Stanford University.

Figure 6 Migration potentials and gradients with
the potentials shown as contours.

424

The algorithm uses hierarchical clustering to generate a
flow map tree for a particular root given a given a set of
nodes, positions, and flow data between the nodes [5].
During layout, the flow map tree is used to merge edges
that run in the same direction, thus minimizing edge
crossings and improving readability.

The map provides several basic insights about
publication and citation patterns in Physical Review.
These insights underscore how interdisciplinary physics
remains, even as it becomes impossible for any one
person to be an expert in more than a small area of it.

7. Further Work

A flow map generated with this algorithm of
migration from California to all other US states for 19952000 is shown in Fig. 10.

Flow maps are a significant improvement over
drawing edges directly between related points with data
on this scale. However, they do not make it easy to note
anything beyond the broadest patterns. An improved
flow map layout algorithm might improve the situation
significantly, as might additional annotation the data
flow map segments aggregate.
One particular improvement would be a multisourced flow map sensitive to the presence of other
sources when laying out edges, reducing the ‘tangle’
factor. An advanced version might even allow edges
from separate sources to merge before reaching their
destinations.

8. Acknowledgements
Figure 10 California migrations flow map

Soma Sanyal retrieved and processed the Nobel
Laureate predictions from ISI, W. Bradford Paley and
Daniel Zeller helped conceptualize the layout and design,
Jan Witkowski, CSHL provided inspiration and
feedback, Waldo A. Tobler and Doantam Phan provided
sample flow maps and advise, Gavin La Rowe was
involved in parsing the data, and the Physical Review
data set was provided by the American Physical Society.
This material is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under grants SBE-0738111,
IIS-0715303, and IIS-0534909. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

Output from the algorithm is easily combined to
show multiple flows in the same space. Shown here are
the top-10 states that migrate to California and to New
York.
The spatial pattern reveals that New York tends to
attract people from the East Coast, while California
residents come from diverse geographic regions in the
United States.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

Figure 11 Immigration to California and New
York

[4]

6. Conclusions

[5]

113 Years of Physical Review makes clear the
difficulties of depicting large numbers of documents and
citation-based information flows. A two-dimensional
reference system is used and a flow map layout applied
to reduce the quantity of ink and numbers of edge
crossings and improve readability.

[6]

425

American Physical Society. 2008. The Physics and
Astronomy Classification Scheme (PACS).
http://publish.aps.org/PACS/ (accessed 4/15/2008).
Redner, S. 2005. Citations Statistics from 110 Years of
Physical Review. Physics Today, vol. 58, 49.
Kessler, M. M. 1963 Bibliographic coupling between
scientific papers. American Documentation, vol. 14, no.
1: 10-25.
Kohonen, T., 1995. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer
Series in Information Sciences, vol. 30.
Phan, D, L. Xiao, R. Yeh, P. Hanrahan, and T.
Winograd. 2005. Flow Map Layout. Proceedings of the
2005 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, vol.
29: 219-224.
Börner, Katy, Shashikant Penumarthy, Mark Meiss, and
Weimao Ke. 2006. Mapping the Diffusion of
Information Among Major U.S. Research Institutions. In
Scientometrics, Dedicated issue on the 10th International
Conference of the International Society for

[7]
[8]

[9]

Final Report. Chicago Area Transportation Study, 1959;
fig. 23, p. 46.
[10] Tobler, W. A. 1987. An Experiment in Migration
Mapping by Computer. The American Cartographer,
vol. 14, no. 2, 155-163.
[11] Coombs, C., J. Dawes, A. Tversky. 1970 Mathematical
Psychology. Engelwood Cliffs, NY: Prentice Hall, 73-75.

Scientometrics and Informetrics, vol. 68, no. 3, 415-426.
Stockholm, Sweden.
Robinson, Arthur H. 1955. The 1837 Maps of Henry
Drury Harness. The Geographical Journal, vol. 121, no.
4, 440-450.
Tobler, W. A. 1981. Model of Geographical Movement.
Geographical Analysis, vol. 13, no. 1, 1-20.

426

