12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Seven Types of Visual Ambiguity: On the Merits and Risks of Multiple
Interpretations of Collaborative Visualizations
Martin J. Eppler, Jeanne Mengis, Sabrina Bresciani
University of Lugano (USI), Switzerland
{martin.eppler@lu.unisi.ch, jeanne.mengis@lu.unisi.ch, sabrina.bresciani@lu.unisi.ch}
Tversky 2005, Fenton 2007, Keel 2007). A special
feature of such visualizations (i.e., sketches, diagrams,
visual metaphors, etc.) is their ambiguity or their quality
to be open to multiple interpretations. Ambiguity is an
inherent trait of language and can be used on purpose to
trigger certain effects in an audience (as for example in
poetry or rhetoric). It is an ambivalent notion, as
ambiguity
can
be
problematic,
leading
to
misinterpretations and misunderstandings, or productive,
showing nuances, uncertainties or tensions inherent in
certain views, terms or statements. Whyte et al. (2007),
in the context of visual practices in project work, state
that “ambiguity may be useful for some tasks, where we
want representations that help us move between focused
reasoning and free association” (Whyte et al, 2008, p. 3).
While verbal ambiguity has received considerable
attention in research (i.e., Eisenberg, 1984; Weick,
1995), the same does not hold true for visual or graphic
ambiguity in collaborative groups contexts. The
ambiguity of visuals has so far been primarily analyzed
in terms of its negative effects (for example as a result of
imprecision) on a single viewer and on ways of reducing
or eliminating ambiguity (D’Ulizia et al. 2008, Avola et
al., 2007), with the exception of Blackwell, Britton et al.
2001 who consider creative ambiguity in the context of
visual programming environments.
Simple examples of intended visual ambiguity can
be found in pictures that amuse viewers by
simultaneously depicting two alternative motives, thus
provoking a perceptual ambiguity (see: Figure 1). The
picture of a duck that, when rotated, becomes a rabbit, or
the portrait of an old lady that can also be seen as the
profile of a young one are examples of this kind.

Abstract
The use of visuals as collaboration catalysts has
recently gained attention in research on group work,
knowledge
management,
sense
making,
and
collaboration in general. A special feature of such
visualizations (i.e., sketches, diagrams, visual metaphors,
etc.) is their ambiguity or their quality to be open to
multiple interpretations. While such ambiguities may
cause misunderstandings and lead to loosing valuable
time, they also offer the potential to reveal new insights,
facilitate ad-hoc discoveries, reframe issues, increase
identification, or stimulate group sense making. In this
article we propose that visual ambiguity in group
contexts is a relational variable that depends on three
elements: the properties of the image, the people
interpreting the image, and the interaction. We use these
categories to propose a more fine-grained categorization
consisting of seven types visual ambiguity: icon, symbol,
index, interpreter background, familiarity, reference and
scope ambiguity. We discuss the potential advantages
and disadvantages of visual ambiguity for collaboration,
as well as ways of exploiting or reducing it. Our
contribution sensitizes researchers and practitioners to
the crucial and often overlooked role of ambiguity in
visual
group
communication,
particularly
in
collaborative contexts. We highlight the diverse forms of
visual ambiguity and how to use this communicative
challenge as a resource rather than simply a risk. A
discussion of future research needs concludes the article.

1. Introduction
‘Ambiguity’ itself can mean an indecision as to what
you mean, an intention to mean several things, a
probability that one or other or both of two things has
been meant, and the fact that a statement has several
meanings.
WILLIAM EMPSON (Seven Types of Ambiguity,
Empson, 1932, p. 5)
The use of visuals as collaboration catalysts has
recently gained attention in research on group work,
knowledge
management,
sense
making,
and
collaboration (Henderson 1991, Whyte et al. 2007,

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.47

Figure 1
Two simple examples of perceptual ambiguity
(Jastrow, 1899, p.312; Boring, 1930, p.444)

391

Another example of visual ambiguity that goes
beyond such entertaining perceptual effects based on
dual silhouettes is shown in Figure 2. It was originally
used in a large organization to facilitate a collaborative
problem analysis in a team meeting. The iceberg
metaphor itself can be interpreted in various ways, as can
the arrows, the thumbs down icons or the color and
strength of the arrows. The arrow, for example, can be
used to represent a vector (with position, orientation,
magnitude), a transition, a designator (i.e. pointing to an
object) (Futrelle, 2000), or a casual or temporal
relationship. Visual ambiguity also arises because
conversers, depending on their background, may
interpret the use or function of the visualization
differently. Finally, ambiguity results when some
discussants comment on the visual’s upper part while
others refer to its lower section without being aware of
their differing areas of focus. These ambiguities can lead
to numerous misunderstandings, lost time and
frustration. However, as we will show in this article,
visual ambiguity can also be a useful catalyst for
knowledge integration in teams (Eppler & Sukowski,
2000).
When various professional groups converse using a
common visual structure that yet has different meanings
in their respective field, the visual can serve as a
translation and transformation device and is called a
boundary object (Star & Griesemer 1989). According to
Star and Griesemer such boundary objects often have
considerable interpretative flexibility, which is not
always a disadvantage. We will argue that visual
ambiguity can trigger useful sense making activities in
groups, activate negotiations of meanings and interests,
provoke probing questions outside one’s area of
expertise and lead to useful clarification discussions.
Visual ambiguity can fulfill an important catalytic role
for group communication and knowledge integration.
This function may be particularly useful in the early
stages of team collaboration when knowledge transfer
needs to be intense and reciprocal, and multiple options
need to be articulated and evaluated.

The premise of this article is thus that visual
ambiguity is not only problematic, but can also be
fruitful for group collaboration. We aim at better
understanding the multiple causes of visual ambiguity in
order to harness its power adequately. To achieve this,
one has to distinguish various forms of visual ambiguity
that affect group communication. This is what we will
set out to do in section three of this article, where a
classification of visual ambiguity in team settings will be
presented. Before, we will briefly review definitions and
approaches to the study of ambiguity as far as they are
relevant to our context of team communication. This
should provide a more balanced view of the role of
visual ambiguity for group collaboration. It should help
to uncover mechanisms by which ambiguity can improve
team collaboration, but at the same team lead to
indicators that help to avoid unfruitful visual ambiguity.

2. Toward an understanding of visual
ambiguity
The ambiguity of visual communication has been
discussed prominently by Roland Barthes in his semiotic
analyses of the rhetoric of images. He showed that
images are polysemic (containing a plurality of possible
messages) and imply a “floating chain” of meanings, of
which the viewer can “choose some and ignore others”
(1977: 39). The connotations of the image change
depending on the context of the image (i.e. its relation to
other images and texts) and depending on the
characteristics of the viewer (i.e. his/her knowledge,
expectations and psychological disposition, as well as the
socio-cultural situation in which he/she finds
him/herself). The picture of a woman smoking a
cigarette, for example, refers not only to the person
inhaling a specific tobacco product (its de-notational
meaning), but evocates various other connotations, such
as freedom and rebellion against social norms vs. feeble
will and dependency. The image in its ambiguity
“becomes more of an abstraction, an available site for the
attachment of multiple connotations serviceable in
multiple contexts” (Edwards & Winkler, 1997: 290).
Ambiguity is not only a trait of visual
communication, it is a characteristic of communication
in general: a message always has (although to different
degrees) multiple and sometimes even conflicting
meanings, depending on the interactional context in
which it is communicated (e.g. Watzlawick & Weakland,
1977). At times, the locus of ambiguity cannot be bound
easily to single elements of a communication event, such
as to the intention and capabilities of the sender, the
attributes of the message (i.e. abstract language, lack of
detail), or the receiver’s interpretation. Rather, ambiguity
is “a relational variable which arises through a
combination of source, message, and receiver factors”
(Eisenberg, 1984: 229, emphasis added). In our current
context this implies analyzing how the sources of
ambiguity of a graphic representation (i.e. its metaphoric
language or specificity in notational conventions) relate

Figure 2: Example of visual ambiguity of an
image used during group communication

392

Visuals can take over the form of ‘boundary objects’
because their ambiguity makes them flexible enough to
be adapted to the specific local needs of different
professional groups (Star & Griesemer, 1989). The
ambiguity of a visual representation enables participants
to maintain diverse perspectives. Still it provides a
shared platform that can ensure sufficient common
ground to translate idiosyncratic perspectives and make
them meaningful across disciplinary boundaries. Visuals,
with their ambiguity, therefore provide ‘unified diversity’
to a cross-disciplinary group (Eisenberg, 1984). The
collaboration and dialogue around an image gives a team
a direction for the interpretation of the visual (which may
be altered later on if need be, given that the ambiguity of
the visual is high enough). The visual representation then
stands for the knowledge co-created in the group and
later on serves as a reminder for that knowledge or
consensus. In this way, the visual also enlists the
participation of the group (see: Henderson, 1991 on
‘inscription device’) and its elasticity is crucial not only
to mediate multiple perspectives, but to organize
collaboration and facilitate consensus seeking.
Given these various advantages of visual ambiguity,
ambiguity can be used on purpose, as ‘strategic
ambiguity’, which can serve different functions, among
them the following: It “(1) promotes unified diversity.
(2) preserves privileged positions. (3) is deniable, (4)
facilitates organizational change” (Eisenberg and
Goodall, 1997: 24).
In view of these aspects, one wonders how
ambiguity can be, at the same time, highly problematic
and beneficial for collaborative work. From a
prescriptive perspective one could ask whether there are
uses of visualization which reduce the risks and
capitalize on the potential of visual ambiguity. A first
step in answering these questions is to gain a more
systematic understanding of what causes visual
ambiguity. In the next section, we will propose, on the
basis of existing classifications, a cause-based
classification of visual ambiguity specific for
collaborative contexts.

to the characteristics of the communicators (i.e. their
intentions, exposure to visuals, professional and cultural
background) and to a specific communicative situation.
The relation between visual ambiguity and the
communicative situation in which the visual is used
refers, in particular, to how the visual is combined with
verbal or spoken text. Barthes argues that whereas once,
the image illustrated the written text and made it clearer,
today, the "text loads the image, burdening it with a
culture, a moral, an imagination" (Barthes, 1977: 26).
The text thus can provide direction in the interpretation
of the visual and may reduce (or amplify) its ambiguity.
Sutcliffe (2005), when analyzing ambiguity in novel,
high-risk situations, observes similarly that ambiguity
can be resolved not by adding information, but by
engaging in debate, clarification and discussion. This is
one advantage of ambiguous visuals in group
collaboration, others are elaborated below.

3. Risks and Benefits of Visual Ambiguity in
Group Collaboration
Ambiguity, visual ambiguity in particular, is mostly
described in the literature as something problematic and
dysfunctional that has to be avoided. The most prominent
case, in which ambiguity proved catastrophic, is the
Challenger space shuttle incident where the presentation
of the test and temperature data was not fully clear so
that different conclusions of the ‘ambiguous’ data were
equally plausible (Sutcliffe, 2005; Tufte, 1997; Weick,
1997). In another context, it has been shown that causal
ambiguity impedes the transfer of best practices
(Szulanski, 2000) because the ambiguity reduces the
credibility of a certain practice. In the specific context of
visualization, the few authors who have paid attention to
ambiguity mostly regarded it as something that has to be
avoided (Futrelle 2000, Favetta and Aufaure-Portier
2000, D’Ulizia et al. 2008).
However, ambiguity is not something per se
negative. Ambiguity allows, for example, for flexibility
over time, for adaptation and fluid re-interpretations, and
is conducive to organizational change (Eisenberg, 1984).
A concept that entails some ambiguity, for example the
formulation of an organizational goal, gives the
organization the possibility to change operations when
they have become maladaptive over time. Ambiguity can
thus prove particularly beneficial in turbulent
environments (Eisenberg, 1984: 233).
Another important potential benefit of visual
ambiguity is that it allows for the coexistence of several
perspectives. Weick (1995) argued that the maintenance
of various perspectives is of particular importance for
gaining resilience in complex situations and high
reliability organizations. This function is important to
support collaborations of cross-disciplinary groups.
Eisenberg and Witten (1987) state that ambiguous
communication “allows divergent interpretations to
coexist and (...) [is] more effective in allowing diverse
groups to work together” (p. 422, emphasis added).

4. A Classification of Visual Ambiguity for
Collaborative Work
Our previous discussion on the benefits of visual
ambiguity has hinted to a first categorization of visual
ambiguity: the distinction between ‘strategic ambiguity’
(i.e. when visual ambiguity becomes a purposefully used
communication device) and ‘perceived ambiguity’ (i.e.
when the ambiguity arises unintentionally during the
communication)
(Eisenberg,
1984).
Further
categorizations discussed in the literature are more
indicative for understanding the causes of visual
ambiguity.
Futrelle (2000) distinguishes between lexical and
structural ambiguity: lexical ambiguity arises when the
context is insufficient to determine the sense of a single
item that has more than one accepted meaning, while

393

positive and negative effects, as well as possible
countermeasures. Countermeasures need not be applied
immediately to fully profit from the potential of an
ambiguous depiction for group sense making.
The visual refers to the visualization itself, and
specifically to the ambiguity that can be caused by the
designer choices of symbols, metaphors, etc (called
information in Gaver et al. 2003 and materialization in
d’Ulizia et al. 2008). For the three types of this category,
we refer to Peirce’s (1894) categorization of signs into
icons, symbols and indices.
The people refers to ambiguities that are created by
differing
professional, cultural, and intercultural
backgrounds of the interpreters (called relationship in
Gaver et al. 2003 and interpretation in d’Ulizia et al.
2008).
The interaction refers to ambiguities that are created
by the use of a visual within a specific context of
interaction and collaboration. This category contains
focus ambiguity (the part of a visual to which a group
refers in a specific moment of their interaction) and
scope ambiguity (the goal for which a visual is used
within a process of collaboration).

structural ambiguity arises when the structure of the
sentence permits more than one correct interpretation.
Gaver et al. (2003), in the context of human computer
interaction, propose three classes of ambiguity as a
resource for design: information (the artefact itself),
context (socio-cultural discourses used to interpret the
artefact), and relationship (interpretive and evaluative
stance of the individual). The uniqueness of Gaver et
al.’s work is the focus on ambiguity as a virtue, as it can
be intriguing, mysterious and delightful.
Whilst the above cited works are important for
gaining a first understanding of what causes visual
ambiguity, they are also limited as they exclusively focus
on how a single viewer interprets a visual. They do not
consider collaborative work contexts, in which the group
interaction itself mediates visual ambiguity. Visual
ambiguity in collaborative settings, is defined by a
situation where a graphic representation of a group’s
work are open to multiple interpretations or when a
visual-verbal contribution of a group member can be
interpreted in more than one way by the participants. We
thus propose a classification of visual ambiguities that
takes into consideration this overlooked aspect of
collaborative work.
We propose a two-level, cause-based classification
of visual ambiguity, which distinguishes between three
categories: the properties of (1) the visual, (2) the people
interpreting the visual, and (3) the interaction among the
people through the visual. Under those broad categories
we identify seven more specific ambiguity types: iconic
ambiguity, symbolic ambiguity and indexical ambiguity
(belonging to the property of the visual category),
background ambiguity and familiarity ambiguity
(belonging to the property of the people), and focus
ambiguity as well as scope ambiguity (belonging to the
interaction category). Figure 3 summarizes these three
related groups and seven types.

Visual
I. Iconic Ambiguity
II. Symbolic Ambiguity
III.Indexical Ambiguity

Type I: Iconic Ambiguity
x Definition: Openness in the interpretation of visual
signs that refer to their content by a relation of
resemblance, likeness, or mimesis. Images, diagrams
and metaphors are all forms of icons (Eco, 1976;
Peirce, 1894)
x Example of ambiguity induced by icon: “I thought
you meant that the iceberg shown in the slide is
melting and that our problems are going away, not
that the most important causes of the problem
remain hidden to us.”
x Positive Effect: New views, ideas and perspectives
on a depiction are brought into the discussion.
x Negative Effect: un-coordinated discussions,
deviations
x Countermeasure:
make
the
interpretation
(associations) of an icon or metaphor explicit

People
IV.Background Ambiguity
V.Familiarity Ambiguity

Type II: Symbolic Ambiguity
x Definition: Openness in the interpretation of visual
signs that are based on agreed conventions and that
“have become associated with their meanings by
usage“ (Eco, 1976, Peirce 1894). Such conventions
can relate to the use of symbols, colors, size, shape,
or position.
x Examples of ambiguity induced by symbol: “I
thought that element is more important and risky
than the others because it’s bigger and drawn in red
color”; “I thought that with the arrow you sketched
on the flipchart you were indicating a sequence and
not a causality” (see Tufte, 2007 for more
information on the latter example)
x Positive Effect: May lead to an unanticipated change
in the interpretation of the visual and promote
serendipity (that is, making a fortunate discovery by

Visual Ambiguity
in Collaborative
Visualization

Interaction
VI. Focus Ambiguity
VII.Scope Ambiguity

Figure 3 Categorization of visual ambiguity
in group contexts
We will now explain each ambiguity category. Then
we will briefly focus on the seven types of ambiguity by
providing a definition, an example, and by discussing its

394

x
x

x

accident), may foster “translation” between different
organizational departments.
Negative Effect: disagreements based on
misunderstandings
Countermeasure: general visualization rules and
conventions and making them explicit

x
x

Type III: Indexical Ambiguity
x Definition: Openness in the interpretation of visual
signs that receive their meaning by the objects they
designate in the concrete communicative context in
which they are used (inductive process). Typical
indices are “a guidepost, which points down the road
to be taken, or a relative pronoun, which is placed
just after the name of the thing intended to be
denoted“ (Peirce 1894: Chapter 2 §3).
x Example: “I thought the sand glass projected by the
beamer was indicating how much time we have
already spent in our meeting and not how far we
have progressed in our meeting agenda.”
x Positive Effect: Clarification of group process
through reflection on interaction process such as
time management, agenda
x Negative Effect: misunderstandings, lost time,
potential for conflict
x Countermeasure: explicitly labeling all items
through a legend

Positive effect: an unfamiliar visualization may
show new perspectives.
Negative effect: it may frustrate unfamiliar users if
visual is too difficult to understand or if they had
previous negative experiences with it.
Countermeasure: conduct an introductory session on
the characteristics of the visual and its meaning and
conventions.

Type VI: Focus Ambiguity
x Definition: Potential difference in the interpretation
of a visual which arises because conversers refer to
different parts of it.
x Example: “I thought you were referring to the lower
part of the drawing right now, not the upper part.”
x Positive Effect: new interpretation of comment,
more cross-references
x Negative Effect: misunderstanding, confusion, lack
of group attention
x Countermeasure: Pointing while talking, using
pointing devices such as lasers or mouse.
Type VII: Scope Ambiguity
x Definition: Potential differences in the interpretation
of a visual because collaborators assume it serves a
different purpose.
x Example: “I thought this picture was only helping us
to analyze the problem, not already document a final
decision”; “I didn’t know we can still change the
diagram.”
x Positive Effect: new uses of a visualization may be
invented ad-hoc.
x Negative Effect: may cause conflicts or prevent
contributions
x Countermeasure: clarify the scope and usage context
of the discussed visualization

Type IV: Background Ambiguity
x Definition: Potential difference in the interpretation
that arises out of the differing cultural, cross-cultural
or professional backgrounds of the collaborators
(including educational level).
x Example: “I was reading your diagram from right to
left instead of vice versa, as we usually do this in
Arab countries. No wonder it didn’t make sense.” “I
thought that symbol represented a decision point, as
we used it in flow charts, and not a document.”
x Positive Effect: learning effects about other cultures
or professions (if discovered), new perspectives. Its
function as a boundary object: loose enough to be
meaningful to many different people in the
organization, like a “social glue” (Fenton 2007)
x Negative Effect: fosters misunderstandings and
emphasizes professional or cultural boundaries.
x Countermeasure:
Agree on shared, explicit
conventions and set standards

Given this overview on the various causes of visual
ambiguity, it is important to underline that visual
ambiguity in collaborative settings is not caused by one
single category, but is defined in the relation between the
three categories (as is indicated in Figure 3 by the
intersection area). In future research, we would like to
examine these interactions more closely. Further future
research needs are outlined in the conclusion below.

Conclusions
In this contribution we have highlighted the
potentially productive effects of visual ambiguity for
collaborative work while not neglecting its risks. Based
on the main causes of visual ambiguity, we have
distinguished among seven different forms and have
categorized them into three groups (visual, people, and
interaction-related ambiguities) that – in their
concomitance – lead to the emergence and resolution of
visual ambiguity.
Currently, we are gathering empirical evidence to
illustrate each type of visual ambiguity and its positive
and negative effects on group collaboration. First

Type V: Familiarity Ambiguity
x Definition: Potential difference in the interpretation
of a visual, which arises amongst collaborators out
of their different familiarities with a specific visual,
i.e. their visual literacy and prior knowledge and
exposure to a specific visual.
x Example: “I interpreted the avalanche pictogram
inside the loop diagram as meaning ‘natural causes’,
not as defining it as a vicious, self-intensifying
cycle.”

395

Factors in Computing System, 5-10 April 2003, Fort
Lauderdale, FL. New York ACM Press.
Jastrow, J. (1899) The Mind's Eye, Popular Science Monthly,
Vol.54, 299-312.
Keel, P.E. (2007) EWall: A visual analytics environment for
collaborative sense-making, Information Visualization, Vol. 7,
48-63.
Peirce, C. (1894). What is a sign?, In: S. Peirce, C.S. (Author),
Peirce Edition Project, Houser, N., Eller, J.R., Lewis, A.C., De
Tienne, A., Clark C.L., Davis, D.B., Eds. (1998) The Essential
Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, 1893-1913, Indiana
University Press, USA
Pinker, S. (1994) The Language Instinct, Harmondsworth:
Penguin Books.
Roos, J., & Bürgi P. (2003) Images of Strategy, European
Management Journal, Vol. 21(1), 69-78.
Shimoijma, A. (1996) On the efficacy of Representations, PhD
Thesis, Indiana University , USA.
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989) Institutional ecology,
'translations' and boundary objects: Amateurs and professionals
in Berkley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Social
Studies of Science, Vol. 19, 389-420.
Sutcliffe, K. M. 2005. Information handling challenges in
complex systems. International Public Management Journal,
Vol 8 (3): 417-424.
Szulanski, G. (2000) The process of knowledge transfer: A
diachronic analysis of stickiness. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, Vol. 82(1): 9-27.
Tversky, B. (2005) Visuospatial reasoning. In: K. Holyoak and
R. Morrison, (Editors). Handbook of Reasoning, 209249, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Tufte, E. (2007) Beautiful Evidence. Graphics Press, Cheshire
(CT)
Tufte, E. (1997) Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative. Graphics Press, Cheshire (CT)
Ulmer, R.R., Sellnow T.L. (2000) Consistent Questions of
Ambiguity in Organizational Crisis Communication: Jack in
the Box as a Case, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 25 (2),
143-155
Watzlawick, P., & Weakland, J.H. (1977) The Interactional
View: Studies at the Mental Research Institute, Palo Alto,
1965-1974, New York: Norton
Weick, K. E. (1995) Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand
Oaks (CA): Sage.
Weick, K. E. (1997) The challenger launch decision: Risky
technology, culture, and deviance at NASA. Administrative
Science Quarterly, Vol. 42 (2), 395-401.
Whyte, J.K., Ewenstein, B., Hales, M., Tidd, J. (2007) Visual
practices and the objects used in design, Building Research &
Information, Vol. 35 (1), 18-27.
Whyte, J.K., Ewenstein, B., Hales, M., Tidd, J. (2008)
Visualizing Knowledge in Project-Based Work, Long Range
Planning, Vol. 41 (1), 74-92

collections of evidence (gathered through narrative
interviews in companies) confirm the potential of visual
ambiguity to lead to greater identification, more
engaging and clarifying debates and creative reinterpretations. In future research we will connect these
testimonials with the developed classification and extend
or adapt it accordingly. This should ultimately lead to a
better understanding of visual ambiguity in group
contexts and to practical advice of when and how to use
visual ambiguity in group contexts.

References
Akin, G., & Palmer, I. (2000) Putting Metaphors to Work for
Change in Organizations, Organizational Dynamics, Winter
2000, 67-79.
Avola, D., Caschera, M.C., Ferri, F., Grifoni, P. (2007)
Ambiguities in sketch-based interfaces, Proceedings of the 40th
Hawaii International Conference on System Science (HICSS
’07), Hawaii
Barthes, R. (1977) Rhetoric of the image, in: Heath, S., Image,
Music, Text, New York: Hill and Wang
Blackwell, A. F., Britton, C., Cox, A., Green, T. R. G., C.A.,
G., Kadoda, G. F., et al. (2001). Cognitive dimensions of
notations: design tools for cognitive technology. In M. Beynon,
Nehaniv, C.L., Dautenhahn, K. (Ed.), Cognitive Technology
(pp. 325-341). Berlin: Springer.
Boring, E. G. (1930) A New Ambiguous Figure, American
Journal of Psychology, Vol. 42, p. 444.
Caschera, M.C., Ferri, F., & Grifoni, P. (2007), The
Management of Ambiguities, (in: Ferri, F. (Ed.): Visual
Languages for Interactive Computing: Definitions and
Formalizations. Hershey: Information Science Reference.
D’Ulizia, A., Grifoni, P., & Rafanelli, M. (2007) Visual
Notation Interpretation and Ambiguities, in: Ferri, F. (Ed.):
Visual Languages for Interactive Computing: Definitions and
Formalizations. Hershey: Information Science Reference.
Eco, U. (1976) Peirce’s Notion of the Interpretant, Modern
Language Notes, Vol. 91 (6), 1457-1472
Edwards, J.L. & Winkler, C.K.(1997) The visual ideograph:
The Iwo Jima image in editorial cartoons, Quarterly Journal of
Speech, Vol. 83, 289-310
Eisenberg, E.M. (1984) Ambiguity as strategy in organizational
communication, Communication Monographs, Vol. 51, 227242.
Empson, W. (1932) Seven types of ambiguity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Eppler, M. J. & Sukowski, O., (2000). Managing Team
Knowledge: Core Processes, Tools and Enabling Factors’,
European Management Journal, Vol. 18, No. 3, 334-342.
Fenton, E.M. (2007) Visualizing Strategic Change: The Role
and Impact of Process Maps as Boundary Objects in
Reorganization, European Management Journal, Vol. 25 (2),
104-117
Fisher, G. H. (1967): Measuring ambiguity, American Journal
of Psychology, Vol. 80, 541–557.
Futrelle, R.P. (2000), Ambiguity in Visual Language Theory
and its Role in Diagram Parsing, IEEE Symposium on Visual
Language, 172-175, Tokio IEEE Computer Society.
Gasperini, J. (1999), The role of ambiguity in multimedia
experience, in: Jacobson R., Information Design, The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gave,r W.W., Beaver, J., & Benford, S. (2003), Ambiguity as a
Resource for Design, Proceedings of the Conference of Human

396

