12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Supporting Research in Historical Archives:
Historical Information Visualization and
Modeling Requirements
Akrivi Katifori, Elena Torou, Costas Vassilakis, Constantin Halatsis
it is typically compiled by archivists to suit archiving
purposes. As a result, even browsing becomes very difficult
without the help of the experienced archive personnel, which
mainly relies on their conceptual model of the archive, rather
than on some explicit representation of knowledge about the
archive content and tools offering guidance and automation
for search tasks. Time-varying information and entity
evolution are also frequently encountered in historical
archives, and the modeling, processing and visualization of
these aspects are not adequately addressed insofar [8] [9].
As HAs constitute a very important source for historical
research, in this work we attempt to investigate the historical
researchers’ needs and propose a set of tools to assist them in
their research in digitized archives. These tools are based on
an ontology [6], a construct that presents an overview of the
domain related to a specific area of interest and may be used
for browsing and query refinement. The proposed set of tools
enables the user to visualize temporal information, indicating
which data varies with the passage of time and enabling users
to efficiently track entity evolution along the time axis. A set
of heuristics is also made available to assist researchers in
locating ontology entities that correspond to different periods
of the same real-world entity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents a user study of historian search methods, section 3
proposes a set of tools to support IR and, finally, the last
section concludes the paper and outlines future work.

Abstract— The on-going progress in the area of digital
libraries has lead to the beginning of a digitization effort in
Historical Archives, as well. The requirements of historical
research, which works with histories of entities and incomplete
information, create the need for supplementary tools to support
users in handling the digitized content. This work is based on a
user study of historian information retrieval methods in order to
create a set of tools for the context of historical archives, which
will facilitate historical data storage, management and
visualization.
Index Terms— historical archive, visualization, information
retrieval, ontology, heuristics

I. INTRODUCTION
The recent progress in the area of digital libraries and the
semantic web has lead to new ways of digitizing, organizing
and presenting library material, enhanced with the
incorporation of semantics. More and more organizations,
libraries and document repositories opt for digitizing their
material, either for internal use or for publishing it through the
web. The great variety of digitized material has brought new
needs and several research issues have arisen.
Digitized historical archives (HAs) could be considered as a
special case of digital libraries; they have however,
characteristics that differentiate them. In particular, the
digitization process in the context of HAs is inherently more
demanding than the equivalent in common digital libraries,
mainly due to the large volume of the original material and its
poor preservation state (at least for some portion of the
material), as well as to the convoluted and archaic handwriting
often found in documents of HAs. At the best case, keywords
or other metadata (creation date, author etc) will be available
[3]. Commonly, documents in a HA are fitted into a
categorization scheme, which has proven to provide little or
no help at all for information retrieval (IR) purposes [4] [7], as

II. A STUDY OF HISTORIAN RESEARCH METHODS
Historians and researchers collect and process historical
data in order to document historical facts and produce information connecting them. Their main objective is to recreate
the past through existing records and their interconnections.
The collection of historical data is accomplished through methodical and comprehensive research in primary and
secondary sources. Primary materials, which include the
remaining records of archives, mail, books, etc of the time
period of interest, are of special importance to historians as
they constitute the basis for original historical research.
Tibbo in [7] presents the preliminary results of a user study
concerning the way historians locate primary resource materials in the digital age. Preliminary results suggest that
electronic finding aids, well-designed websites and digitized
documents, are helpful and should be available in archives, but

Manuscript received February 14, 2008. This work was supported in part
by the Greek Secretariat for R&D under the PENED 2003 framework.
Elena Torou, Akrivi Katifori, and Constantin Halatsis are with the Dept. Of
Informatics
and
Telecommunications,
University
of
Athens,
Panepistimioupolis, Ilissia, 157 84, Athens, Greece, tel:+302107275241,
{etorou,vivi,halatsis}@di.uoa.gr
Costas Vassilakis is with the Dept. of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Peloponnese, Terma Karaiskaki 22100, Tripolis, Greece, tel.
+302710372203, costas@uop.gr

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.70

32

cannot still be considered as replacements for more traditional
methods of making collections available; the role of the
archive personnel also remains important in aiding the
historian. Digital library and archive tools made available to
historians could be significantly improved by taking into
account the methodologies employed by historians when
searching within historic information. These methodologies
include certain tasks, both regarding location of information
and its visualization, which can be facilitated by historic
archive tools. . As suggested in [7], there is a lack of user
studies on this issue. In order to identify the historic
researchers’ needs and requirements, we combined two
different approaches: (a) the study of queries made by
historians to the Historical Archive of the University of
Athens and the use of semi-structured interviews with
historians. Both these approaches and their results are briefly
described in the following sections.

ers who have visited the HA of the Athens University more
than 3 times. The participants were chosen to be familiar with
digital IR technologies, so as to provide a more complete view
on information both on digital and printed sources.
The interview has two parts: The first part contains general
questions recording the historian’s profile, which primary
sources of material -digital and/or printed- s/he employs, general types of queries s/he poses, generic concepts that s/he researches and what is his/her general method to retrieve information both in digital and in printed sources.
The second part of the interview was composed of seven IR
tasks. Four of these were typical queries to the HA of the University of Athens, whereas the remaining three were based on
queries made to the HA, but transformed to facilitate our task
of recording information on how different search types were
conducted.
The analysis of the second part of the interview, which
contained specific IR tasks, produced several observations
related to the historian search methods:
1. They identify and isolate keywords on the topic of their
research. These keywords are very often entities like persons, places or organizations.
2. In many cases, the scope of the search is limited to a specific time point (date, year, etc) or period.
3. Researchers initially search using a single keyword at a
time; afterwards they perform searches combining more
than one of the identified keywords, for example name –
date, or place – name – date. Finally, researchers use
synonyms and derivatives of the keywords (e.g., for the
topic “history of the department of Chemistry”, besides
the word “Chemistry” they would also use the word
“chemical”), while they may introduce new concepts they
consider related; e.g., for the “Department of Chemistry”,
they would introduce “study programme”, “professor” or
“book”. Related terms may be derived from generic or
more specialized concepts relevant to the initial ones (e.g.
for “Undergraduate Student” they may use “Student” or
“PhD Student”); related terms may also be connected to
the initial ones with relations like “belongs to” or “works
at” (For the “Department of Chemistry”, “Faculty” or
“University” could be possible related terms – see Fig. 1).
Introduction of synonyms and related terms is referred to
as “search enrichment process”; synonyms and related
terms can be combined with the initial search keywords.
It should be noted here that the process of enrichment of the
initial terms with related ones, as derived from the study of the
hypothetical IR tasks proposed to the interviewed historians, is
in accordance with the model of the human mental lexicon
described in [6]. It is suggested that concepts in our brain are
represented in a semantic network of words, as in Fig. 1. The
strength of the connection and the distance between the nodes
are determined by the semantic relations or associative
relations between the conceptual nodes. This model assumes
that activation spreads from one conceptual node to those
around it, with greater emphasis to the closer ones. A
hierarchical structure is also present in this network,
classifying concepts in more generic and more specific ones.

A. Study of Queries to a Historical Archive
The set of queries that users have made to an HA, each requesting documents relevant to a specific subject, can provide
useful information on the historians’ interests in relation with
the HA contents and the typical query categories posed to an
archive. We analyzed approximately 100 user queries made to
the Historical Archive of the University of Athens and
grouped them by query topic, as shown in Table I.
TABLE I. TOPICS OF QUERIES MADE TO THE ARCHIVE
Topic
Percentage
Person Biographies
24%
Historical Evolution of Institution/Organization
18%
Ceremonies
15%
General Socio-political issues
13%
Economic issues
10%
Administration of Institution/Organization
8%
Request for artistic or photographic material (photographs
6%
of persons, portraits, monuments, etc)
Books
6%

As seen from Table 1, evolution-related queries, either person
biographies or institution histories are predominant among the
queries, re-enforcing thus the notion that time and entity evolution is of great importance in the context of an archive.
Approximately 32% of the queries had a user-specified time
period or time-point in varying granularities to restrict the
search; granularity, ranged from a whole century (“Names and
biographies of professors who taught philosophy in the University of Athens after its creation in the 19th century”) to specific dates (“Speech given in the Great Hall of the National
University on April 21st, 1896”). In most queries, however,
year-level granularities were used (“Information for the Chair
of Physiology of the Medical School from 1931 to 1939”).
Therefore, providing support for entity evolution and time-restricted queries would be important in the context of an HA.
B. Structured Interviews
A user group of 15 historical researchers was interviewed
for gaining insight on how they search for historical information. The user group consisted of 5 men and 10 women. 4 of
them are employees of the HA, and 11 are historical research-

33

University
Faculty

Department
Chemistry

•

Person

Professor

Student

•
Lesson

Fig. 1. Example of a semantic net, derived from a researcher’s answer for
the query “History of the Department of Chemistry”. Note the generalization
relation for “Student” and “Professor”, as she explained that after looking for
“Students” or “Professors” she would search for other “Persons” related to the
specific department.

•

Therefore, in this case it seems that an ontological structure,
which in fact models the creation of a semantic network incorporating taxonomies, is highly suitable for storing metadata
for primary historical sources, while it can also be used as a
repository for historical information, both for research and
educational purposes. These results are in accordance with the
ones reported in [16].
Besides requirements for information modeling and processing, the semi-structured interviews provide insight on the
requirements for the visualization of information and the user
interface in general. The user should be able to easily limit the
scope of the visualized information to a designated period or
even time point; concept hierarchy should be presented clearly
and the ability to move upwards and downwards this hierarchy
should be also provided. Synonyms for concepts in the domain
of discourse should be also made readily available to users.
Finally, since entity evolution is an important task in historical
archive research, special provisions for designating timevarying data and visualizing entity evolution chains should be
made.

An ontology, which is used to organize the
knowledge contained in the HA, by classifying,
indexing, linking and providing meta-data for the
documents.
A pre-defined set of parameterized heuristics, which
may be used by historians to assist their common research tasks. At this stage, emphasis has been put on
the task of discovering entity evolution.
A visualization methods library, providing intuitive
and interactive presentations of both knowledge recorded in the ontology and heuristics results.
Heuristics

Historians/
Archivists/
Researchers

Archive Ontology

Metadata, indexes,
linkage…

Visualization library

Archive corpus

Fig. 2. Toolset components and architecture

The following paragraphs describe the modules in more detail.
A. Historical Archive Ontology
As a first step and with the co-operation of a historian in our
team, we created an ontology of the HA of the University of
Athens [12], in order to test its efficiency as a tool for historians and use it as a basis for experimenting with the proposed
toolset.
The creation of an ontology for an HA is a complex
process, since the digitized archive documents are not in text
format, making automatic concept extraction impossible, and
the concepts that must be captured may vary among different
time periods. For compiling the ontology, the user-centric
methodological approach presented in [4] was used.
After creating the first complete version of the archive ontology, we prepared an experiment to evaluate (a) the researchers’ reaction to this representation of historical knowledge and (b) the efficiency of existing ontology visualizations
for historical IR tasks. Four different Protégé [10] ontology
visualizations were used in this evaluation and the preliminary
results may be found in [9]. These results suggested that
special attention should be given to the modeling and
visualization of the ontology features related to entity
evolution.
Regarding the modeling of an HA ontology, we note here
that this ontology is temporal, i.e. besides the classes, entities
and their properties and relationships, it needs to express the
way that these constructs evolved along the time axis. Modeling such an ontology using existing tools was cumbersome
and resulted into an excessively complicated model, mainly
due to the fact that most environments for ontology
management (e.g. [10] [13]) deal with ontology snapshots, i.e.
they model and manage only the most recent version of
ontologies. In order to facilitate the storage and management
of time-varying information in an ontology, we extended the
Protégé ontology editor, integrating into it data types for
historical properties, which are properties capable of storing
the different values that this property has been assigned, along

III. A TOOL SET TO SUPPORT HISTORICAL RESEARCH
Taking into account the digital HA characteristics and historian needs, we propose a set of tools to aid historical research
in the context of an HA. These tools are based on the ontology
of the organization the material of which the archive contains.
An ontology was chosen as the means for organizing
knowledge since it offers a number of advantages. First, it
allows meta-data to be stored separately from the documents
themselves (but still linked to them); this was essential in the
context of the HA since archive material may either be
unavailable in electronic format or available as scanned
images only. This metadata may be then exploited in IR tasks,
including formulation of initial queries, broadening and narrowing the scope of searches [2] etc. Ontologies may be also
correlated with existing categorization schemes [1], making
them more understandable and more efficient. Second, ontologies allow for expressing rich semantics in a formal way, facilitating thus both browsing by historians and the operation of
heuristics. Finally, recent research has shown that historians
and archivists can easily learn and adopt an ontology-based
representation of historical information within an archive and
perform IR tasks through it [8], [9].
The proposed toolset for supporting historical research consists of (Fig. 2):

34

with the corresponding time period. For example, the property
Name in the University entity can be a historical property and
its value for a specific instance may be {(Othonian University,
[1837-1911]), (National University, [1912-1922]), (National
and Capodistrian University of Athens, [1922-now])} to
reflect the changes in the name of the specific University. This
provision alone, however, is not sufficient for modeling all
possible evolutions since, in some cases, entities have
undergone more radical changes, which cannot be modeled
through simply recording different slot values: e.g., a
laboratory may have evolved to a museum, which is a
completely different entity type. To allow the explicit
recording of such evolutions within the ontology, slots
“previous” and “next” have been included in the ontology
meta-schema, where links to immediate predecessors and
successors, respectively, can be stored. The extended version
of Protégé is more extensively described in [11] and [8].

single visualization method could be effective enough and
accommodate all requirements. More specifically, as
identified in [8] and [9], tree-link visualizations tend to leave a
lot of unused space on the top (or left) of the screen and
overpopulating the other side, making thus ineffective use of
the available space and necessitating a considerable amount of
scrolling. On the other hand, the indented list paradigm cannot
visualize effectively multiple inheritance, while role
relationships (including previous and next in evolution) are
only shown in item details panes and not as visual links [8]
[9]. Provisions for synchronizing the focus of the two panes
are also made.

B. Visualization
The implemented toolset provides users with the following
visualization options:
1. Restrict the display to classes, entities and relationships
pertaining to a specific time period.
2. Visualize the entity timeline, i.e. the entity’s evolution
along the time axis. Both the evolution information recorded in the ontology and the evolution heuristics results
are supported by this feature. More details on evolution
detection and visualization are given in the next section.
3. Co-display the timeline of multiple entities; this has
proven to be a very useful tool for historians, enabling
them to draw conclusions on the interdependencies of
historical entities and events.

Fig. 4. The tree visualization, focused on the “University” class.

The visualization allows the user to select the classes and
instances that will be initially displayed, through a configuration panel. A class or instance containing temporal slots (providing thus the ability to model evolution) is denoted using a
static clock, whereas classes or instances that have actually
evolved (i.e. they have a temporal property that has changed
its value, or they point to a previous or next entity) are marked
with a moving clock. Isa-links are always visible (black arrows), while links to the previous/next instances can be configured to be visible when an entity is selected; having previous/next links always visible has been found to clutter the display and hinder user tasks [9]. Navigation within the graph
may be performed either using the graph scrollbars or through
the context menu of the selected instance (Fig. 4). The context
menu allows the user to view the values of the selected
entity’s slots, as well as its type and evolution links. By
clicking on an instance or class within the context menu (value
of a slot, entity type or previous/next item), the clicked
instance/class becomes selected within the graph and the
graph scrolls to make the selected entity visible. If the entity
reachable through some relationship is not currently displayed
on the graph, clicking on it automatically leads to its inclusion
on the graph and focusing on the selected node, thus the user
may dynamically extend the graph as an integral part of the
exploration process. Navigation through the context menu has
been favorably commented by users in a preliminary
evaluation, since it allows them to reach related entities
without having to visually search through the graph.
The ability to focus on a specific time period is provided
through a slider, through which the user may designate the beginning and end of the period of interest (target period slider
in fig. 3). Entities with which are not known to be valid during
the selected period (either because their validity period has not
been set or because it does not overlap with the period of interest) can be configured to be either grayed-out or to be not
included in the graph.

Fig. 3. The visualization main window.

A main result in the ontology visualization experiment
described in [9] was that ontology visualization alone is not
enough for supporting complex queries. However, a
visualization with interactive features, combined with a
powerful search mechanism may be very effective. To this
end, the Protégé [10] Class Browser, an easy to use and
familiar to users indented-list visualization, was combined
with a tree layout visualization with enhanced functionality in
order to support the temporal characteristics of the ontology as
well as the visualization of entity timelines (Fig. 3). Both the
indented list and the tree layout visualization paradigms
inherently support hierarchies, satisfying thus the user need to
organize concepts hierarchically and navigate along hierarchy
links, moving from generic to specific concepts or vice versa.
Using both paradigms was considered necessary, since no

35

The prototype also incorporates a search facility (fig. 5),
which allows users to locate entities whose content matches
given keywords. The search panel’s functionality allows again
the user to focus the scope of the search to a selected time period; the scope of the search can also be set to either the whole
ontology or to the items displayed in the main visualization
window. Double-clicking on a search result (or selecting the
appropriate function from the context menu) causes the main
visualization window to focus on the selected entity.

After the user has selected an entity, the heuristics tool proceeds with locating other instances which may represent the
same real world entity (for example a student who later became a professor) (fig. 7), identifying thus possible evolutions.
The search is carried out based on a set of pre-defined rules
which the user may customize. An example of such rule is
checking the similarity [14] of the “Name” slot values of
compared instances; this is a key common practice used by
historians for locating instances corresponding to the same
real-world entity (e.g. person, department etc).

Fig. 7. Entity Evolution Detection Window. Results for the entity “John
Smith” are presented.
Fig. 5. Search panel.

C. Detecting and visualizing entity evolution
An important feature of the plug-in is the visualization of
the entity timeline (fig. 6), which is invoked through the context menu (cf. fig. 4). The timeline may include entity splits
(e.g. the Othonian University splits into the National and the
Capodistrian University) or merging of multiple entities into a
single one. Similarly to the visualization window, the entity
timeline window includes a slider through which the user may
set the period to be visualized. For easier access to timevarying information, the entity timeline window allows the
user to display the values of time-varying slots into the entity
icon (slot “name” of entity “Othonian University” in fig. 6).

Fig. 8. Heuristics Configuration: Select Classes Pane

Fig. 9. Heuristics configuration: definition of rules for detecting entity
evolution

The user can parameterize the entity evolution detection
process through the configuration window (Fig. 8). There the
user may designate the top level class (or classes) under which
search would be conducted. If the ontology designer has
predefined groups of upper-level classes for which evolution
among members of their instances is possible, the pertinent
groups are retrieved and used as defaults. For example, the
evolution group {Laboratory, Museum} indicates that a laboratory may have evolved into a museum (and vice versa). The
user may also define rules applied on the slots of the selected
entity and those of the instances belonging to the selected
classes (Fig. 9) to determine whether a pair of instances actually represents the same real-world entity.
As a next step, the system traverses all instances of the
designated classes to locate sets of instances that adhere to the
specified rules, i.e. having identical or similar [14] values for
specific slots or for which the specified conditions hold. For
instance if a search under the class “Person” is conducted, the

Fig. 6. Entity evolution visualization

The default functionality of the entity evolution visualization window is to visualize evolution information explicitly recorded in the ontology (previous/next slots). One of the tasks
of historian researchers is however to correlate facts in order
to reach conclusions regarding the evolution of entities; these
conclusions may be later recorded in the ontology in the form
of facts. To facilitate this task we have implemented a set of
heuristics that simulate to some extent the way the historians
locate this information. This proposal is complemented with
related visualizations, to further assist the user in viewing the
entity evolutions and navigating across involved entities. This
functionality is integrated with the visualization library and
attempts to track entity evolution by exploiting the meta-data
embedded in the ontology meta-model.

36

system could be asked to check the date and place of birth,
parent names, etc. Inequality checks can also prove useful, e.g.
if the “graduation date” of a “Student” named John Smith is
later than the “hire date” of a “Lecturer” John Smith, then
there is little probability that the two instances refer in fact to
the same person. As another example, consider the case that a
specific Geology “Laboratory” ceased to exist as such at a
certain date, and some time later a Geology “Museum” was
established at the same premises. These known facts can be
combined to deduce that the laboratory was transformed into a
museum, and may give incentive for further investigation to
the researcher. So, for these cases similarity in the name of the
instance and the fact that certain dates may be consecutive
(temporal continuity) or be apart for less than some userdefined threshold (e.g. 2 months), can be in fact strong
indications of a relation of succession between the two
instances.
For determining similarity between slots, thesauri for
synonyms (generic or domain-specific) as well as lexical
databases (e.g. Wordnet [15]) are employed. The
superconcept/subconcept relationship provided by Wordnet
has proven useful in determining whether entities have been
merged into a single one or, conversely, split into multiple
entities. For example, if a “Natural Science” department
ceases to exist and the departments of Biology and Geology
emerge, the heuristics can determine that the two newly
founded departments are created as specializations of the
formerly existing one (which is effectively split into two
entities), exploiting the information that “Natural Science” is a
superconcept of both Biology and Geology.
By applying the heuristics presented above, the system
formulates sets of instances that potentially constitute the
evolution of a single real-world entity. The relationships
between potential predecessors and successors are recorded
into slots introduced for this purpose, namely “possible next”
and “possible previous”. Each relationship recorded within
these slots is tagged with a confidence metric, which is
effectively a quantification of the similarity between instances
computed by the heuristic.
The user may review the heuristic results, and select items
to populate either the next/previous or the probable
next/probable previous slots. When heuristic results are
displayed, each evolution arc in the visualization depicting
heuristic results is labeled with the confidence metric
computed for the specific succession. The prototype plug-in
along with installation instructions may be found in [5].

full-scale evaluation is being designed, based on queries made
to the historical archive in order to assess its effectiveness for
supporting historical research and investigate its efficiency in
answering complex, time-related queries in comparison with
existing ontology browsers.
Issues that are currently being investigated in parallel are the
integration of OCR technologies performing word-level
recognition for archive documents available only as scanned
images, the use of weighted ontologies and spreading
activation for assisting information retrieval and the provision
of tools to support historians in the creation and maintenance
of personal archive of notes and documents.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This work proposes a toolset for modeling and visualizing
historical information, aiming to assist researchers in studying
historic material; the toolset makes special provisions for
tracking and visualizing entity evolution, which is an
important task for historic researchers. The design and
implementation of the toolset has been based on a user study,
aiming to record the historians’ IR methods in the contents of
an HA and investigate ways to support them. A preliminary
evaluation is currently being conducted on the prototype, and

37

Katifori, A., Golemati, M., Lepouras G.: Ontology Aided Information
Retrieval in Digital Historical Archives, Proceedings of CSITeA ’04,
December 27-29, 2004, Cairo, Egypt
Fluit, C., Sabou, M., van Harmelen, F.: Ontology-based Information
Visualization, In Visualizing the Semantic Web, Springer Verlag, 2002
Pitti, D. V., Encoded Archival Description, An Introduction and
Overview, D-Lib Magazine, Vol 5, No 11, November 1999
Torou, E., Katifori, A., Vassilakis, C., Lepouras, G., Halatsis, C.,
Creating an Historical Archive Ontology: Guidelines and Evaluation,
Proceedings of ICDIM 2006, December 06-08, 2006, Bangalore, India
Vassilakis, C., Katifori, A., Torou E., TimeViz: A temporal Ontology
Visualization Plugin,
http://oceanis.mm.di.uoa.gr/pened/index.php?c=publications#plugins
Noy, N. F., McGuiness, D. L., Ontology Development 101: A Guide to
Creating Your First Ontology, Stanford Knowledge Systems Laboratory
Technical Report KSL-01-05, 2001
Tibbo, H. R., Primarily History: Historians and the Search for Primary
Source Materials, in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM/IEE-CS joint
conference on Digital Libraries, 1-10, 2002
Katifori, A., Vassilakis, C., Lepouras, G., Daradimos, I., Halatsis C.,
Visualizing a Temporally-Enhanced Ontology, proceedings of the ACM
AVI 06 Conference
Katifori, A., Torou, E., Halatsis, C., Lepouras, G., and Vassilakis, C., A
Comparative Study of Four Ontology Visualization Techniques in
Protégé: Experiment Setup and Preliminary Results, proceedings of the
IV 06 Conference.
Protégé, http://protege.stanford.edu/
Vassilakis, C., Lepouras, G., Katifori, A., t-Protégé – A Temporal
Extension for Protégé, Technical Report TR-SSDBL-06-001, June 2006,
available through http://t-protege.uop.gr
Katifori, A., Torou, E., Giannopoulou E., Vassilakis, C., Lepouras G.,
Athens University Ontology,
http://oceanis.mm.di.uoa.gr/pened/index.php?c=publications#ontos
KAON, http://kaon.semanticweb.org/
Hatzivassiloglou, V., Klavans, J., and Eskin, E., Detecting text similarity
over short passages: Exploring linguistic feature combinations via
machine learning. In Procs of SIGDAT EMNLP/VLC, 1999.
Fellbaum , C., (ed), WordNet An Electronic Lexical Database, MIT
Press, 1988.
Katifori, A., Torou, E., Vassilakis, C., Lepouras, G., Halatsis, C., and
Daradimos, I., Historical Archive Ontologies – Requirements, Modelling
and Visualization, in Proceedings of RCIS 07, April 23-26, Ouarzazate,
Morroco.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B., Mangun, G. R., Cognitive Neuroscience,
The Biology of the Mind, pp 289-294, W. W. Norton & Company, New
Ed edition (April 1998)

