12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Information Sky: Exploring the Visualization of Information
on Architectural Ceilings

1
2

Martin Tomitsch1, Thomas Grechenig2, Andrew Vande Moere3, Sheldon Renan4

Research Group for Industrial Software, Vienna University of Technology, martin.tomitsch@inso.tuwien.ac.at
Research Group for Industrial Software, Vienna University of Technology, thomas.grechenig@inso.tuwien.ac.at
3
Faculty of Architecture, Design & Planning, The University of Sydney, andrew@arch.usyd.edu.au
4
Vision (+) Strategy, srenan@gmail.com

looking up. Based on the observation that humans
learned to look up to increase knowledge about their
situational awareness, we argue that the ceiling
represents a natural opportunity to provide contextual
information and guidance in indoor environments based
on the metaphor of the sky.
In Native American storytelling, stars often
constructed the stage for ancient tales about gods. The
concept of using the space “up” for narrative
representations is further supported by historic European
ceiling art. For example, ceiling frescoes from the
Renaissance period typically feature stories with
historical or biblical origins.
Based on these observations, we introduce the
concept of information sky, which consists of the
augmentation of the ceiling with information that
supports people who pass through that space, in and
during their daily activities. We suggest that the ceiling
as an information space has the potential to reduce the
visual noise in the everyday environment by moving
particular bits of information onto the ceiling and into the
periphery of our perception. On the other hand, it can
also serve as a default space for monitoring critical
information, since a ceiling is a large-scale prominent
surface that is visible from various viewing angles within
the space it covers.
In this paper, we define three categories for
information sky, contextual information, navigation and
guidance, and storytelling, and investigate their
applicability for visualizing information. We further
describe four application scenarios based on the notion
of information sky and relate them to the presented
categories.

Abstract

In this paper we suggest the ceiling as a new
physical surface for information visualization. To
provide a design framework for application designers,
we present the notion of ‘information sky’. This concept
is based on (1) the metaphor of the natural sky, (2)
historical examples of ceiling art and (3) recent
computing
paradigms,
including
mediatecture,
ubiquitous computing and ambient display. We further
introduce three distinct categories that denote potential
application
domains
for
ceiling-based
data
visualizations. Finally, we present four different
application scenarios we have developed using
prototyping and user-centered design techniques, and
discuss how they relate to the categories.
Keywords--- Ambient display, ceiling display,
physical visualization, responsive environments,
interactive architecture, mediatecture.

1. Introduction
In the information society of today, we are
surrounded by 360 degrees of visual “noise”.
Information exists all around us, embodied as traditional
(e.g. billboards) or digital (e.g. screens) media. The only
surface that seems to remain free, open, and available is
the architectural ceiling. The conceptual counterpart of
the ceiling in a natural environment is the sky, since both
are visually accessible by looking up. In history the
architectural ceiling has often been associated with the
natural sky and has become decorated with elements
resembling the natural sky, including stars, clouds or
birds. As an example, consider ancient ceiling art found
inside of Egyptian tombs (see Figure 1, right).
In terms of representing information, the sky is
richer than a typical indoor ceiling: it provides us with
several clues about time, location and environmental
conditions. In the natural world, when people needed to
know what, when and where, they usually began by

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.81

2. Foundational paradigms
This chapter elaborates on the contributing
paradigms that set the stage for the notion of information
sky. They provide an inspirational, conceptual and
technological design framework for applications in that
realm. We briefly explain each paradigm and discuss its
contribution to the framework.

100

Figure 1. Examples of ceiling arts: cave
paintings at the Altamira cave in Spain (left) and
an ancient Egyptian ceiling inside the tomb of
Sethi I (right)

Figure 2. LED display ceiling covering a new
shopping mall in Beijing (left) and multimedia
sky above the winter garden of the Bertelsmann
residence in Berlin (right)

2.1. Ceiling art

state-of-the-art in display technology, pointing out
emerging trends in this area.
Mediatecture applications typically exploit largescreen displays situated in public or semi-public
environments for display of simple arbitrary patterns or
visualizations of data. The data, such as weather data or
stock data, may be represented figuratively (e.g.
temperature value) or abstract (e.g. light patterns). Most
contemporary ceiling display applications belong to the
category of mediatecture. A few of the most impressive
and well-known interactive ceilings are the Fremont
Street Experience in Las Vegas, or the LED display of
250 meters length installed in the ceiling of a shopping
mall in Beijing, showing a fake fish tank and other
animations (Figure 2, left3). Both ceiling displays aim to
add to the experience of the architectural environment,
but do not aim to represent nor communicate
environmental relevant data. The multimedia sky above
the winter garden of the Bertelsmann residence in Berlin
(Figure 2, right4) is an example for a large-scale media
ceiling display that represents dynamic information, such
as real-time weather data retrieved from a nearby
weather station.

We ground the design framework partly on the
specific subdomain of ceiling art. The architectural
ceiling has been used as a platform for visualizing
information throughout many centuries. Based on this
observation we argue for the rediscovery of the ceiling
for visualizing digital data.
Ceiling art can be traced back to the first days of
human evolution. Cave art represented an intellectual
instrument, which encouraged discussion and storytelling
[1]. In that respect the ceiling at that time was not treated
different to other surfaces, such as walls (Figure 1, left1).
In contrast, ceilings from ancient Egyptian temples
featured elements that are associated with the sky, such
as stars and flying birds representing different protective
deities (Figure 1, right2). This was due to the fact that
every Egyptian temple was built like a microcosm and
the ceiling in the halls consequently visualized the sky of
this temple microcosm.
Some of the most impressive examples for ceiling
art can be found during the Medieval and Renaissance
periods. The purpose of ceiling frescoes was storytelling
and reflecting major beliefs of that period. From a social
perspective the intention of ceiling frescoes was to
communicate the power and wealth of the proprietors to
the people visiting the architectural space.
Historical examples of ceiling art often encode small
bits of information using a rich set of visual expressions.
For example, the richly decorated wooden ceilings at the
Alhambra in Granada, Spain, reflect the emperor, who
was in power at the time the ceiling was created. There
are several rooms next to each other, featuring different
decorations, such as emblems and other symbols,
representing different emperors.

2.3. Ubiquitous Computing

We used mediatecture as one of the foundations for
information sky, arguing that projects from this field are
based on the same motivation, which is the integration of
digital media and architecture. Particularly, it reflects the

As another foundation of information sky, we draw
on recent advancements in ubiquitous computing
technology and user-driven application development. Of
particular interest in this respect are techniques that
allow interaction over a distance (e.g. pointing) and the
scientific exploration of large-scale display technologies.
However, the ceiling is a very distinctive area, compared
to others that have already been explored more
thoroughly in the context of ubiquitous computing
concepts, such as the wall [2] or the floor [3]. It is
therefore important to particularly design and evaluate
interaction concepts for ceiling-based scenarios, when
borrowing them from related ubiquitous computing
research. In previous work we investigated laser pointing
and free hand pointing for ceiling interaction and derived
initial design implications from our results [4].

1

3

2.2. Mediatecture

2

retrieved from http://museodealtamira.mcu.es
retrieved from http://www.osirisnet.net

4

101

photo by AP / Andy Wong
retrieved from http://www.bertlesmann.com

The field of ubiquitous computing envisions an
environment, where computing technology dissolves into
the background of everyday environments. Applications
from that realm are generally characterized by being
non-obtrusive and do not require full attention of the
user. The research field has seen a promising
development in recent years, especially due to significant
advances in both information and communication
technologies. Ceiling applications specifically rely on the
progress of display technologies towards a future ideal of
interactive wallpapers: affordable displays that can be
easily distributed in our environment and used for largescale visualizations.

technologies in the context of art projects (see [8] for
examples). Concepts that emerged from this work, such
as social architecture [9], represent an important
foundation for information sky applications.

3. Information sky categories
The design framework for information sky
applications is grounded on the natural metaphor of the
sky and the paradigms described above. The categories
of the framework, which we already introduced in the
introductory section of the paper, are contextual
information, navigation and guidance and storytelling. In
this chapter we define these categories and describe how
they relate to each other.

2.4. Ambient information visualization
Ambient information visualization or ambient
display refers to the visualization of information at the
periphery of human attention [5]. An ambient display
provides specific bits of information without requiring
full attention of the user. Only if an event occurs that
needs immediate response, the user is alerted to focus on
the ambient display. Matthews et al. identified several
levels of notification: ignore, change blind, make aware,
interrupt and demand action [6].
The architectural ceiling literally sits at the
periphery of human perception and therefore represents a
natural opportunity for ambient display of information.
The theory of ambient display consequently represents
an important foundation for information sky.
The field of information visualization aims to
provide users with tools that achieve a better insight into
complex data structures and new interaction paradigms
that enable effective navigation within the resulting
representations [7]. Techniques used for visualizing data
provide a potential toolset for designing the visual
concept of information sky applications.

3.1. Contextual information
This category is mainly based on the concept of
ambient display. We suggest augmenting the ceiling with
contextual information that users need to be aware of
while focusing on other tasks. The fact that the ceiling is
located at the periphery of human perception allows
users to maintain a continuous awareness of the
information displayed. Similar to ambient display,
applications from this category should alert users,
exploiting the aforementioned notification levels.
Foundation. The underlying principle for this
category is the behavior of looking up for receiving
further information in the natural world. The sky
constantly provides us with additional contextual and
peripheral information, such as the current time and
upcoming weather conditions through light conditions,
clouds and the relative position of the sun.
Example. An illustrative example for this category
is a research project by Meagher et al. [10] that
investigates the integration of sensors into the ceiling for
measuring environmental conditions, such as humidity or
temperature. The goal of this project is to allow space
occupants to select their work location based on a
ceiling-based representation of environmental conditions.
Data. Any data can be represented that features
characteristics defined by the concept of ambient display,
such as non-vital, dynamic, context-related, etc.
Particularly, the visualization of spatial data denotes a
promising
application
area
for
ceiling-based
representations, since it allows a direct mapping of the
physical location onto the ceiling. Examples of spatial
data are environmental conditions (see above), sound
level and network coverage (e.g. Wi-Fi reception) within
a closed space.

2.5. Responsive environments
As another foundation, we base information sky on
the recent field of responsive environments. Projects
from this field follow the same motivation as information
sky, which is the enrichment of architectural spaces with
information relevant to the inhabitants.
A responsive environment is a space that interacts
with the people who use it or passers-by [8].
Applications from that realm are therefore different to
mediatecture applications since they explicitly enable
interaction. They use sensor technologies, such as motion
tracking or face detection for detecting the presence and
activities of people. Applications from this paradigm
exploit and enhance available architectural structures or
spaces. In this respect, it is different to the paradigm of
ubiquitous computing, which includes the augmentation
of physical objects.
The field of responsive environments is distinctive
since it spans new media art installations. In recent years,
many new media artists have been exploring the
application of new information and communication

3.2. Navigation and guidance
For the second category we suggest the application
of the ceiling for navigation and guidance within
architectural environments. The advantage of the ceiling
as a platform for navigational cues is that it is not already
occupied by other kinds of information displays. This
also suggests the application of the ceiling for displaying

102

information in emergency cases, such as indicating
dangerous areas and directions towards the closest exit.
Applications within this category provide relevant
information about directions or places. They either show
general information that changes depending on
parameters like the time of the day or user-specific
information. The latter presumes that the environment is
aware about both the presence and the intentions (i.e.
where the person wants to go to) of people passing
through that space. There is a broad body of research in
context recognition available that addresses these issues.
Foundation. This category exploits the natural
behavior of looking up for receiving a sense of
orientation. In case the immediate environment is lacking
specific clues, people are still able to derive knowledge
about directions and their location from looking at the
sky, based on the position of the sun or the stars.
Example. A notable example for guidance within a
building is OMA’s design concept for the Seattle library.
Their original concept featured real-time navigational
cues on the floor, exploiting the spatial nature of a library
to support visitors in their orientation [11].
Data. Any data that helps people orient themselves
within an architectural space falls into this category. This
can be either a visualization that points the user towards
a certain direction (e.g. a sign) or a representation that
maps spatial information (e.g. the location of a specific
spot within a large room) onto the ceiling.

visualizing the arrival and history of e-mails and e-mail
conversations, based on the metaphor of storytelling
(compare [13]).
Data. Most time-varying data can be used for
creating stories. Examples are ambient data (e.g. noise
level or amount of movement), remote data (e.g.
presence patterns of distant people) and digital/virtual
data (e.g. e-mail conversations).

3.4. Discussion
The categories presented above suggest a
classification scheme for information sky, but at the
same time also serve as potential application areas. The
first two categories, contextual information and
navigation and guidance, describe application scenarios
of very practical nature: they add to the quality of the
architectural space by augmenting it with context- or
user-related digital information and can potentially
improve the problem of visual “noise” overload by
porting information into the periphery of human
perception. The most promising category is contextual
information, which suggests that most applications will
fall into this category. Applications within the third
category, storytelling, primarily aim at creating an
ambience, similar to Renaissance ceiling frescoes, but
based on dynamic visualizations and enhancing social
interactions between passers-by.
In the following chapter we discuss four application
scenarios that we developed based on the notion of
information sky to gain further insights into the
categories and their value for application designers. We
briefly describe the prototypes and discuss how they
relate to the proposed design framework.

3.3. Storytelling
Storytelling makes an important part in the life of
humans. While the importance of physical objects for
storytelling has been acknowledged [12], there is also
scientific evidence that digital artifacts possess similar
potential [13]. Based on this research, we suggest
exploiting the architectural ceiling as a platform for
displaying digital information that evokes storytelling.
The narrative aspect can further arise from the
information itself, informing people about historical
events or conversations that happened in that space. Due
to the spatial location of the ceiling, applications from
this category should not aim at involving users in long
interactions that require constant awareness. In an initial
study we found that interacting with a ceiling-based
representation over a long period tends to be tedious and
should be limited to five tasks in a row [4]. Applications
should therefore take advantage of the peripheral
character of the ceiling and engage users in short
dialogues.
Foundation. We base the category of storytelling on
the observation that throughout human history people
used the space above them (both the sky and the ceiling)
as a framework for storytelling, e.g.: Native American
tales were often based on the stars. Ceiling paintings
typically featured a story, but also inspired people to tell
stories to each other about historical events and personal
experiences.
Example. Similar to ceiling frescoes from the
Renaissance time, the ceiling could be exploited for

4. Applications
4.1. The weather ceiling display
The weather ceiling display [4] conveys information
about the short-term weather forecast as an ambient
display projected onto the ceiling. The concept is based
on the behavior of looking up in the natural world for
receiving information about the upcoming weather. The
weather data is visualized in an abstract and iconic way.
Temperature is represented as color and weather
conditions are embodied as symbols. A blue ceiling
anticipates a cold day, while a yellowish color promises
a warm day. Animated water ripples or snowflakes
floating over the ceiling inform the user about rain or
snowfall respectively.
The application was prototyped using a projector
pointed towards the ceiling in one of the offices at our
research group (Figure 3, left). The metaphor of the sky
applied to an indoor ceiling for visualizing weather data
was well understood by people passing by. However, the
animated symbols turned out to be too distracting for
people working in the office room. Further evaluation is
required to determine the application’s usefulness and
impact in its foreseen context, which would be a hallway.

103

To explore the ceiling for representing spatial
ambient sound information, we followed a user-centered
design
process,
involving
expert
interviews,
questionnaires and a design workshop with 10 deaf and
hearing-impaired participants [15]. This work led to a
design prototype, consisting of two separate systems.
One of the systems represents a ceiling display that
shows the spatial location of ambient sounds by
projecting ripples onto the ceiling. The color of the
ripples is mapped to the pitch and the number of ripples
is based on the volume. In the design workshop the deaf
and hearing-impaired participants from our study
appreciated and understood well the idea of locating
sounds inside a room through the visual representation
on the ceiling. They also suggested the application of this
system in public environments, like shopping malls,
hospitals and subway stations. However, they preferred
having a traditional screen for receiving further
information about sounds (e.g. identification) inside their
flat.
Depending on the actual scenario, mapping acoustic
data onto the ceiling provides either contextual
information (e.g. the sound of a household device in
operation) or navigation and guidance (e.g. the knocking
on a door).

Figure 3. The peripheral weather application
showing cold temperature and rainfall (left) and
the sound-responsive ceiling display visually
reflecting the sound level inside a space (right)

The weather ceiling display represents an example
for the category of contextual information. It augments
the context of a hallway or any other space where people
pass through before leaving a building with information
about the short-term weather forecast at the current
location. The information is displayed at the periphery of
human perception and does not require any user
interaction.

4.2. Sound-responsive ceiling
The sound-responsive ceiling display consists of an
array of 12 micro-units that cover the ceiling of a room.
The system visualizes the current distribution of the
room’s sound level in real-time through the changing of
ambient light patterns (Figure 3, right). Each unit is
equipped with a microphone that features a directional
characteristic (i.e. it reacts more sensitive to sounds
received directly beneath the microphone) and an LED.
The units are networked to each other, and each unit puts
the measured value representing the sound level on the
network, which allows adapting the light intensity of
each LED to the overall sound inside the room.
The application is still work in progress and we are
currently developing a second revised generation of
micro-units. As an application scenario we foresee the
installation of the ceiling display in a café or bar. This
would allow visitors to choose their table based on the
current distribution of the sound level within the space
by simply glancing at the ceiling.
The sound-responsive ceiling provides additional
information within a space in terms of representing the
spatial mapping of acoustic data onto the ceiling. It
therefore represents an example for the category of
contextual information.

4.4. Ceiling-based long-distance communication
In this project we investigated the application of the
ceiling as an ambient display to provide remote
awareness about distant loved-ones, through various
means, such as motion, noise level, etc. The project was
inspired by recent research that investigated the potential
of ubiquitous computing technologies to improve
intimate long-distance communication [16]. The goal
was to create an environment that enhances traditional
explicit communication (such as a phone call) with
implicit means of communication. While explicit
communication requires people to have a reason for
contacting someone [16], concepts based on implicit
communication aim at providing a continuous awareness
about the partner’s (remote) presence and/or his/her
emotional state.
We conducted qualitative interviews with six
participants that lived in a long-distance relationship at
the time the interviews were completed. Findings from
the interviews were reported in [17].
One of the application scenarios that received a high
rating from the qualitative interviews allowed users to
create patterns on the ceiling (Figure 4). Throwing a ball
at a pixel changes its color, thus enabling entertaining
interaction over a distance. This particular application
engages distant people in an abstract communication,
allowing them to express their (emotional) state. Created
patterns would fade out over time, providing a trace of
past events and “conversations”. Thus, this application
corresponds to the category of storytelling.
The application was implemented as a wizard of oz
prototype [4] and we are currently working on an

4.3. A sound-aware ceiling display for the deaf
This prototype addresses the issue that deaf people
have difficulty in keeping track of ambient sounds [14].
Examples for ambient sounds are children playing in the
next room, a fire alarm, or the knocking on a door. These
sounds constantly provide us with important clues about
our immediate environment – information that is often
lost for deaf people.

104

[3]

[4]

[5]

Figure 4. Design prototype for an application that
enables users to interact over a distance,
painting patterns that eventually create stories
over time and usage

[6]

interactive version that would allow a longitudinal
evaluation of the concept.

5. Conclusions
[7]

We introduced the concept of information sky as a
design framework for ceiling-based information
visualization. The framework is grounded on historical
examples of ceiling art as well as recent computing
paradigms. Historical examples span different epochs of
human history from cave art to the Renaissance period.
Based on the discussion of historical and contemporary
influences, we identified three categories for information
sky: contextual information, navigation and guidance,
and storytelling. We also described examples for each
category and identified lists of data that can be
represented on the digital sky. In the remainder of the
paper we presented four application scenarios based on
the notion of the digital sky that we developed at our
group and discussed how they relate to the presented
categories.
The purpose of the framework described in this
paper is to point out potential application areas for
projects that exploit the ceiling for the visualization of
information. It supported us in our research in terms of
selecting application scenarios for information sky. It has
further proven to be a valuable design tool for reflecting
on the data that we wanted to convey in our applications.
The definition of information sky as a surface for
visualizing information constrains the means of data that
can be represented, thus also defining the design space
for information sky applications. The framework should
therefore help application designers to decide whether
the ceiling represents an appropriate surface for the data
they want to visualize. We also highlighted specific
design considerations in this paper, which we plan to
incorporate into a set of design implications in our future
work.

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

References
[1]
[2]

[17]

P. Johnson. Art: A New History. Harper Collins, 2003.
N. Streitz, T. Prante, C. Röcker, D. Van Alphen, C.
Magerkurth, R. Stenzel, D. and Plewe. Ambient Displays
and Mobile Devices For the Creation of Social

105

Architectural Spaces. Public and Situated Displays,
O’Hara, K. et al. (eds.), Kluwer Academic Pub., 2003.
M. Graves-Petersen, P. Gall Krogh, M. Ludvigsen and A.
Lykke-Olesen. Floor interaction HCI reaching new
ground. Extended Abstract on Human factors in
computing systems (CHI’05), ACM Press, Portland,
Oregon, 1717-1720, 2005.
M. Tomitsch and T. Grechenig. Reaching for the Ceiling:
Exploring Modes of Interaction. In Adjunct Proceedings
of the International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing (Ubicomp’07), 2007.
J. Mankoff, A. Dey, G. Heish, J. Kientz, S. Lederer and
M. Ames. Heuristic evaluation of ambient displays. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’03). ACM Press,
169-176, 2003.
T. Matthews, A. Dey, J. Mankoff, S. Carter and T.
Rattenbury. A toolkit for managing user attention in
peripheral displays. In Proceedings of the ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology
(UIST’04), ACM Press, 247-256, 2004.
A. Vande Moere. Form follows Data: the Symbiosis
between Design and Information Visualization. In
Proceedings of International Conference on ComputerAided Architectural Design (CAADfutures'05). OKK
Verlag, Vienna, Austria, 31-40, 2005.
L. Bullivant. Responsive Environments: Architecture,
Art and Design, V&A Publications, London, UK, 2006.
L. Bullivant. 4dsocial: Interactive Design Environments.
Architectural Design, vol 77 (9), Wiley-Academy,
London, UK, 2007.
M. Meagher, J. Huang and D. Gerber. Revisiting the
Open Plan: Ceilings and Furniture as Display Surfaces
for Building Information. In Proceedings of
International Conference Information Visualization
(IV’07). IEEE, 601-606, 2007.
OMA/LMN. Seattle Public Library. Actar, 2005.
S. Whittaker. Things to talk about when talking about
things. Human-Comp. Interact., 18 (1-2), 149-170, 2003.
F.B. Viegas, D. Boyd, D.H. Nguyen, J. Potter, J. Donath.
Digital artifacts for remembering and storytelling:
posthistory and social network fragments. Proceedings of
the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, IEEE, 1-10, 2004.
T. Matthews, J. Fong and J. Mankoff. Visualizing nonspeech sounds for the deaf. In Proceedings of the
International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS’05), ACM Press,
52-59, 2005.
M. Tomitsch and T. Grechenig. Design Implications for
a Ubiquitous Ambient Sound Display for the Deaf. In
Proceedings of the Conference & Workshop on Assistive
Technologies for People with Vision & Hearing
Impairments (CVHI’07), 2007.
R. Etter, C. Röcker and D. Gilgen. Supporting emotional
communication between multiple users in intelligent
home environments. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Interactive Environments (IE’06). IET,
41–50, 2006.
M. Tomitsch, T. Grechenig and S. Mayrhofer. Mobility
and Emotional Distance: Exploring the Ceiling as an
Ambient Display to Provide Remote Awareness. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on
Interactive Environments (IE’07). IET, 164-167, 2007.

