12th International Conference Information Visualisation

LabChart: A Support System for Collaborative Research Activities
in University Laboratories and its Practical Evaluations
Youzou Miyadera1, Shoichi Nakamura2, Taisuke Nanashima3, Setsuo Yokoyama4
1,2,3) Tokyo Gakugei University, 2) Fukushima University
1) miyadera@u-gakugei.ac.jp, 2) nakamura@sss.fukushima-u.ac.jp
information and transitions between research types. In
this paper, “collaborative research activity” means that
members can exchange useful research information,
including unformed information, with other members at
any time, and members can remain aware of the research
situation of other members.
Systematically managing and sharing information in
any sizable organization can be difficult and tedious,
though, and a more effective means of supporting such
research information sharing is needed.
Efforts to solve these problems have included
studies on ways to accumulate and share the know-how
in an organization, and on ways to support the creation of
new knowledge by linking opinions and ideas [1]-[12].
However, problems remain. Sharing within an
organization was the main target of these studies, so
there were no attempts to properly organize personal
viewpoints. In many cases, researchers in university
laboratories carry out research individually, so personal
viewpoints
constitute
important
information.
Furthermore, transitions that occur in one’s research can
go unnoticed or be incomprehensible to others, and
members may lack the means to easily share the
information of other members or seminar participants.
A trade-off arises between information sharing in an
organization and personal management of research
transitions. For information sharing, all members should
use an orderly structure with the same constraints and
common expressions. On the other hand, for personal
management, free arrangement with fewer constraints
and room for individual viewpoints should be allowed.
Our goal is to avoid this trade-off by developing a
collaborative research activity support system. In this
paper, we describe a research information transition
graph (RITG), explain a method for conversion to a
common view, and examine the use of our collaborative
research activity support system. Furthermore we
describe the results of the system evaluation through
application of it.

Abstract
This paper describes a support system for
collaborative research activities in university
laboratories. The system includes (1) a research
information transition graph (RITG) to visually express
research information and the relationships among the
information for personal management, and (2) a method
that enables collaborative research activities and
knowledge sharing on a large scale by converting an
RITG into a common view with specified constraints on
redrawing. These issues are related to the solving of a
trade-off problem between the management of research
information based on personal viewpoints and the
sharing of such information on a large scale.
Furthermore this paper describes the results of the
system evaluation through application of it. Furthermore
this paper describes the results of the system evaluation
through application of it.
Keywords--- Research Information Transition
Graph, Collaborative Research Activity, LabChart,
Information Visualization

1. Introduction
Research activities in organizations such as
university laboratories often require members to study
material from related research fields, and members
sometimes take over responsibility for research
information from senior members. Therefore, the
research information possessed by each member should
be available to all members. Furthermore, collaboration
among members through information sharing is
important.
Research information can be classified into two
types: formed and unformed. Formed information
includes published papers, documents regarding research
in progress, PowerPoint files used for seminars, and so
on. Unformed information includes preliminary ideas,
problems, and advice. Such information tends to be
scattered among printed papers, electronic files, and
ideas in a researcher’s head.
To facilitate collaborative research activities using
both types of information, important goals include
collecting research information into one place,
classifying and arranging the information, and grasping
the significance of the various bits of research

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.15

2. Current Research Activities
2.1 Problems
Certain
activities:

169

underlying

problems

hinder

research

Problem (1): Research information can be difficult
to classify and organize because it is scattered and exists
in many forms such as electronic documents, printed
documents, and so on. It is thus difficult to accumulate
relevant information and use it efficiently given the huge
volume and many kinds of existing research information.
Problem (2): Managing research transitions, such as
the development of relationships between different types
of research information and the changes in these
relationships over time, can be difficult. Understanding
how such relationships develop and change becomes
increasingly difficult as the quantity of information
grows.
Problem (3): Communicating research information
transitions to other researchers can be difficult, although
it is important to express clearly how one's research has
taken new directions.
Problem (4): Sharing research information can be
difficult, although it is important to promote the sharing
of research information.
Problems (1) and (2) are related to the management
of research information based on personal viewpoints.
Problems (3) and (4) are related to the sharing of
research information within an organization.
Solving the four problems simultaneously should
eliminate the trade-off problem described above. This
will promote more productive and collaborative research
activities.

We want to solve Problems (1) to (4) by developing
a collaborative research support system based on RITGs.
Such a system should meet the following requirements:
Requirement (1): Allow users to arrange and
manage research information in a unified manner, and
provide a personal field for each user to create a RITG.
Requirement (2): Allow each user to arrange and
move nodes and edges freely according to his or her
personal viewpoints.
Requirement (3): Allow users to communicate their
research transitions to other users, and enable users to
understand the context of each research transition.
Requirement (4): Allow users to share their
research information with other researchers by making it
easy to exchange research information with other users.
These requirements respectively correspond to the
four problems stated above.

3. Organizing Research Information with a
RITG
In the RITG, we want to arrange research
information as nodes and express research transitions as
edges. This graph will make it easier to organize research
information, and will enable the management of research
information based on personal viewpoints.
First, to determine what kinds of information and
transitions should be included in the graph, we surveyed
17 researchers through questionnaires and oral
interviews. Each respondent was asked to list research
information classifications and transition classifications,
and their reasons for choosing the classifications. We
then selected the most appropriate classifications from
the list and created the typical classifications shown in
Table 1. The abbreviations shown in Table 1 are also
used in Figures 1 and 2. In this study, we treat these
classifications as research information.

2.2 Our Approach
To solve the four problems, we use a research
information transition graph (RITG) which draws
together the research information created through
research activities in a personal field. Each RITG node
expresses research information with a classification
(Table 1 in Section 3) and each RITG edge expresses a
transition with a classification (Table 2 in Section 3) as
their respective attributes. This graph is a directed one
since an edge indicates information transition. Figure 1
shows an example of an RITG. Each node label includes
an abbreviation corresponding to the node type, as given
in Table 1. Each research member has an individual field
as shown and draws an RITG based on their original
viewpoints.

Table 1. Classifications of research information
Kinds (abbreviation)
Related research (Rer)

Seminar data (Sem)
Web information (Web)
Valuable
(Val)

information

Solution (Sol)

solutions
problems

Other information (Othr)

of

specified

ideas
detailed
information of
specified information
others

Unformed

problems of specified info.

Detailed information (Dtl)

170

valuable information from
designated information

Problem (Prb)

Idea (Idea)

Figure 1. Example of a Research Information
Transition Graph

Formed

Product (Prd)

Explanation
publications,
technical
papers, related documents,
etc.
unpublished
documents,
program source codes,
data, etc.
link
information
for
seminars
to
formed
information
information
from
the
Internet

complete a new questionnaire. First, they created an
RITG from examples we provided using the
classifications in Tables 1 and 2. Second, they created an
RITG from their own research activities. We then
extracted the tendencies for a standard common view.
Based on this survey, we obtained the following
three patterns as a standard common view:
• Pattern (1): the x-axis of the plane in which an RITG is
drawn indicates the time sequence (from left to
right).
• Pattern (2): the field is divided into a number of
existing classification areas in the up and down
directions, and these divisions are used as the y-axis
to arrange nodes.
• Pattern (3): a set of related research information is
arranged more closely.
Pattern (3) does not apply to the whole field, and is
contradictory to Patterns (1) and (2). In this research, we
therefore decided to use only Patterns (1) and (2) as
constraints of a common view.
Figure 2 shows an example of a common view. By
tracing the registration time as the x-axis and the
classification type as the y-axis, we can see how products
are developed using other information. Conversion into a
common view enables others to grasp research
transitions based on unified viewpoints. It also enables
an understanding of other members' current situation.
That is, other members' problems can be grasped and this
will make it easier to provide useful information and
comments to other members.

Table 2 shows the research transition classifications.
We treat these classifications as research transitions.
Table 2. Research transition classification
kinds
Update & progress
Origin
Application

Explanation
update and progress
additional information for specified
information.
applications
of
specified
information

Second, we created an RITG, which is an attributed
directed graph.
Each node expresses research
information with attributes such as classification, author,
date, title, and so on. The graph also has x and y
coordinates. Users can freely arrange nodes according to
their personal viewpoints. Each edge expresses a
research transition with a classification attribute. This
graph should be constructed on a personal field. Figure 1
shows an example of an RITG which has the following
meaning.
• [Problem1] has occurred from [RelatedResearch2],
[RelatedResearch3] and [RelatedResearch4].
• [Product2] is a result obtained from [Product1] and
[Idea1] from [RelatedResearch4].
• [Product3] is a progression from [Product2] using
[RelatedResearch6], [Web] and [Problem2].
• If there is no connector from [Problem2], this means
that [Probelm2] has not been solved and new
research is possible.
In this way, many kinds of scattered research
information from various research activities are managed
in a unified manner. Classifying and organizing,
understanding research transitions, and managing
research transitions become less tedious. Solving
Problems (1) and (2) makes it possible to manage the
research transitions according to personal viewpoints, so
Requirements (1) and (2) are satisfied.

4. Converting an RITG to a Common View
Figure 2. Example of a Common view
In the previous section, we explained how research
transition management can be accomplished through free
arrangement of the nodes based on personal viewpoints.
However, this could make it harder for other researchers
to understand transitions because each researcher has a
different way of looking at things. This problem occurs
because of context differences between members.
To solve this problem, we propose having a single
unified context. Therefore, we have developed an RITG
with a single common unified context, which we call a
“common view”.
To achieve this, we first had to extract standard
tendencies in the arrangement of RITGs, and then
convert these to a common view arranged with
constraints. To find a standard common view, we had the
17 researchers who responded to our original survey

Thus, the common view helps members carry out
collaborative research activities and share valuable
information. This will solve Problems (3) and (4), so
Requirements (3) and (4) will be satisfied.

5. Modeling
5.1 Modeling the RITG
The RITG is defined as follows to enable processing
by computer [13].
[Definition 1] Research information transition graph G
consists of three elements: G= (V, E, Π). V is a finite set
of research information. v (V∋v) is a node of the graph

171

and expresses research information. E is a finite set of
connectors. e (E∋e) is a connector of the graph and
expresses research transition. Π is a finite set of
coordinate functions (V to I2). //
[Definition 2] Research information attributes of an
RITG are defined as attV = (kindV, titleV, dateV, ownV,
memoV, π). Each attribute is attached to the node and its
meaning is as follows:
• kindV expresses the classification of the research
information. kindV is defined as kindV=(Related
research | Product | Seminar information | Web
information | Valuable information | Problem |
Solution | Idea | Detailed information Other
information). The classification of research
information v (V∋v) is written as kindV(v).
• titleV expresses the title of the research information
expressed by any strings. The title of research
information v is written as titleV(v).
• dateV expresses the date and time of the research
information creation. The date and time at which the
research information v is created is written as
dateV(v).
• ownV expresses the author of the research information.
ownV is defined as ownV={Name of author}. The
author of research information v is written as
ownV(v).
• memoV expresses the memo of a node which is written
by users.
• π is the coordinate function of research information.
The coordinates of research information v are
written as π(v)=(πx(v), πy(v)). //
The node coordinates depend on the coordinate
functions. The functions are related to the users’
viewpoints.
[Definition 3] Research transition attributes of an RITG
are defined as attE = (kindE, memoE). Each attribute is
attached to the connector, and its meaning is as follows:
• kindE expresses the classification of the research
transition. kindE is defined as kindE=(
Update&progress | Origin | Applicaton). The
classification of research transition e (E∋e) is written
as kindE(e).
• memoE expresses the transition memo, which is
written by users. //
[Definition 4] Each item of research information has
individual sub-attributes as follows:
• att Related research=(author, title, publication years,
magazine, volume, number, filename, memo)
• att Product=(author, uploadtime, filename, memo)
• att Seminar information=(author, presentation time, filename,
memo)
• att Web information=(author, uploadtime, URL, memo)
• att Valuable information, Problem, Solution, Idea, Detailed information, Other
//
information=(author, uploadtime, filename, memo)
The significance of π is as follows. In the case of
managing research information transition based on
personal viewpoints, an individual user gives the
coordinate value. In the case of sharing research
information within an organization, the coordinates are

automatically set based on the given constraints. The
constraints will also be formalized with mathematical
equations.

5.2 Modeling the Drawing Condition of Common
Views
We want to treat the drawing conditions of common
views as sets of independent constraints. This will be
related to the development of many kinds of common
views.
First, we introduce the constraints.
C1: The nodes are arranged in the order of their
registration time on the x-coordinate.
C2: Each node is not overlapped on the x-coordinate.
C3: The nodes, except for the focus node, are arranged
between the focus nodes on the x-coordinate.
C4: Nodes of the same types are arranged on the same
y-coordinate.
C5: Nodes of different types are not overlapped in the
y-coordinate.
C6: The node types are arranged in a specified order
on the y-coordinate.
The drawing conditions for common views are
provided by combining constraints.
[Definition 5] The drawing conditions of common views
are defined as follows:
CV1 = C1 & C3 & C4 & C6.
CV2 = C1 & C2 & C4 & C5 & C6.
CV3 = C1 & C2 & C3 & C4 & C5 & C6. //

6. Development
6.1 System Outline
We have developed a collaborative research
activities support system, called LabChart, which
resolves the trade-off regarding the personal
management of research transitions and research
information sharing within an organization.
On the client side, we use a Windows-machine as
the development and action environment and use Delphi
as a development language. We used the Windows
environment, which is widely used for many other
applications, because we wanted to make the user burden
as light as possible, and because this would simplify
development and implementation of this system with
regard to, for example, graph drawing and interactive
operations. On the server side, we used a Unix-machine
as the development and utilization environment, PHP as
a development language, and MySql as the data base
management system. Sixteen tables were defined as the
database. Communication between the server and the
client was implemented using HTTP because of firewall
considerations.
This system consists of three functions:
Managing Function: registration and deletion of
research information, management of research transitions
through free arrangement of the nodes (research
information) based on personal viewpoints, etc.

172

Sharing function: Various kinds of search, common
views, seminar schedule display, etc.
Collaboration Function: exchange of research
information among members, etc.
These functions are explained in detail below.

of a graph with corresponding classifications, and
enables users to visually express transitions by using
edges to show relationships between the nodes. The user
arranges the research information that occurs during
research activities in the free place on the personal field
as a node. Figure 3 shows an example of an RITG
arranged by a user according to the user’s personal
viewpoint.

6.2 Managing Function
The function for managing research information
enables users to freely arrange various types of
information created through research activities as nodes

Figure 3. Organization of Research Information
For registration, users designate the kind of
information from the list panel and the file name of the
research information by clicking with the right button of
a mouse. The designated file is instantly uploaded to the
server through HTTP, and is registered to the database.
In this case, the user can input a title for the node if so
desired.
Attribute information other than the title is set up
automatically by the system. For all research
information, except related research, the user should only
need to do the title input. For related research,
considering the unity of the research paper, the user can
use part of the bibliographic information to determine
whether the paper has already been registered (or is a
new paper). Input of all the bibliographic information is
necessary only for the registration of new papers.
If the user wants to add transitions, the two nodes
must be selected from the personal field, and then a
connector added between them. The connectors are
treated as directed arcs in our model. To express a
connector in the system, the arrows are treated as
undirected, and the initial point of a connector connects
the right side of the node and the terminal point of the
connector connects the left side of the node. The nodes
are color coded according to the type of research
information and who is the owner.

Operations, such as registering, deleting, copying, or
pasting nodes and the replacement of files, are
implemented by clicking with the right button of the
mouse. By connecting nodes with a connector, the user
designates a transition. Even if the node is moved, the
connectors attached to the node will follow it
dynamically. By continuing these processes, we can
obtain an RITG, and can then register the RITG to the
database. Free arrangement of research information
based on the user’s viewpoints is realized.
The nodes which make up an RITG each hold
attribute information for the node and link information to
an actual file of research information. The reason for this
is to guarantee the unity of contents so that the original
file of research information is not affected, even if nodes
are copied or replaced.
As shown above, management of research
information based on personal viewpoints on the
personal field of each user can be achieved. The
transitions affecting all research activities, and the
relation between the pertinent information, can be easily
understood. Therefore, system requirements (1) and (2)
are satisfied and this management function can
contribute to the solution of problems (1) and (2).

173

Figure 4 shows an example of the retrieval subfunction. Sorting by each item of attribute information, a
user can see extracted information from his preferred
viewpoints. The user can view the author's field and an
RITG, and then extract new information and add it to his
own field. A user examining another’s RITG can offer
comments or advice by adding a new node. Conversely,
a user who receives comments can freely add and
arrange the nodes in his or her field according to
personal preferences and viewpoints.

6.3 Sharing Function
6.3.1 Retrieval Sub-function
The information sharing function enables any of the
research information within the organization to be
retrieved. The retrieval sub-function can extract
information by using search keys such as kind, author,
title, date, project name, and so on. Full text search is
also implemented. Retrieval targets encompass all of the
research information within the organization.

Figure 4. Example of retrieval sub-function
In this way, the retrieval function makes it easy to
refer to any of the research information from members of
the organization. For example, research information from
senior members and unformed information, which
otherwise tends to be buried, can be used effectively.
On the server side, automatic text extraction from
the various kinds of format research information is kept
in (such as WORD, PowerPoint, Excel, TeX, html (Web
file), PDF and zip (composed file)) has been
implemented for the retrieval sub-function.

contents of a research transition easier for others to
understand. Figures 5 to 7 show actual examples of
common views, converted from the original RITG of
Figure 3, based on drawing conditions CV1 to CV3,
respectively.
The research transitions of other members can be
shared in this way, satisfying Requirement (3) and
helping to solve Problem (3).
If a common view drawing has many nodes and an
RITG extends beyond the screen boundary, a slide bar is
displayed. It is beneficial that, theoretically, the personal
field and the number of the nodes be unconstrained. The
LabChart system has been developed with no restriction
on them. However, there are restriction regarding
programming languages and the Windows system.
Although we have implemented three kinds of
common view, we think more are needed. As occasion
demands, we plan to develop different common views.
Through repetition of [Various retrieval operation +
Reference of RITGs + Common view transformation], it
should become easy to acquire research information and

6.3.2 Common View Sub-function
RITGs registered in LabChart can be freely referred
to by all members. When a user refers to other members’
RITGs, he or she might find it difficult to understand the
content of research transitions from the free arrangement
of nodes. In such a case, a common view is useful.
The common view sub-function enables users to
unify their viewpoints for arranging nodes by converting
others' RITGs into a common view. This makes the

174

see the research transitions of other members from
various viewpoints.

The sharing function is thus a prerequisite for the
collaboration function.

Figure 5. Common view based on CV1

Figure 6. Common view based on CV2

Figure 7. Common view based on CV3

175

6.4 Collaboration Function

6.4.2 Seminar Schedule Sub-function

6.4.1 Research Information Passing Subfunction

The seminar schedule is an important part of the
daily activities in university laboratories and is referred
to frequently. Therefore, a timetable of the laboratory’s
seminars is included as a collaboration function. Seminar
information, such as who is speaking, when the seminar
will take place, and what kind of research it concerns,
can be registered in advance which makes it easier to
control the seminar schedule. Furthermore, if an article
prepared for a specific seminar is announced, other
members can avoid the redundancy of presenting the
same article. In addition, research information from the
timetable of seminars can be searched for. The action
screen is shown in Figure 8. The nodes registered as
seminar information are arranged on a one-month
timetable based on the presentation time sub-attributes.
The range for one week can be spread length-wise by
increasing the number of seminars.

The research information passing sub-function
enables users to copy any of the research information
registered on the LabChart, either their own or that of
others. While viewing the RITGs of others, a user can
offer comments or advice by adding a new node.
Conversely, users receiving comments can freely add
and arrange the corresponding nodes on their field based
on their viewpoints. Thus, all research information can
be copied freely from anywhere to anywhere.
To show which information is related to the offered
information, connectors can be added between them.
Dark colored fields on the left side in Figure 3, Figures 5
to 7 are collaboration fields, and the nodes on these fields
are offered information. The user who was offered
information can see that information was offered by
other members when he notices the nodes displayed in
the collaboration field. Two offered nodes (nodeID: S20,
S21) are shown in Figure 5-7, and one of them (S21) is
connected to a node (nodeID: 460) in the personal field.
This means that useful information was offered regarding
Web information.
Clicking the offered information with the right
mouse button opens a pop-up menu, and the person
offered the information can select [Refer to the contents],
[Adaptation of the information], or [Unadaptation of the
information]. The adapted information can be included
as an RITG node and can become part of a research
transition.

6.4.3 List View
The view of the information management that does
not use an RITG is also required. Therefore we prepared
the list view which users can see research information
like a windows interface. The example screen
corresponding to Figures 3, 5-7 is shown in Figure 9.
The collaboration function thus enables smooth
research
information
collaboration,
satisfying
Requirement (4) and helping to solve Problem (4).

Figure 8. Timetable of Seminars

176

Figure 9. List View
Q12: Taking into account the effort of using the
system, does the LabChart system help your
research activities?
Q13: Please write down your comments about the
LabChart system (including ways you think the
LabChart system can be improved and the ways in
which LabChart most helps research activities).
Q14. Which the common view did you use well?
Question 1, questions 2 to 3, questions 4 to 5, and
questions 6 to 10 respectively correspond to
Requirements 1, 2, 3, and 4. Questions 11 and 12
concern the overall usefulness of the LabChart system.
Question 13 is to give respondents an opportunity to
freely state their opinions and ideas about LabChart.
Question 14 asked which common view users prefer to
use.

7. System Evaluation
About one year after the LabChart system was
implemented, collaboration on research activities
centered on the LabChart system in our research
laboratory began to stabilize. In this section, we discuss
the system’s effectiveness. To evaluate this, we had 21
researchers in our laboratory complete a questionnaire
consisting of 14 questions:
Q1: How well does the system make it easy to classify
and manage research information?
Q2: How well does the system classify research
information through nodes and connectors?
Q3: How useful is the system in helping you
understand connections between different types of
research information or research transitions through
nodes and connectors?
Q4: How well does referring to the RITGs of others
help you understand connections between other’s
research information or research transitions?
Q5: How well do the common views help you properly
understand connections between others' research
information or research transitions from multiple
viewpoints?
Q6: When you want to get research information from
the RITG of another member, how easy is it to get
the research information?
Q7: How much does research information offered by
other members help your research activities?
Q8: How easily does the system allow you to offer
research information to other members?
Q9: How easily does the system allow the exchange of
opinions and research information among members?
Q10: How useful is the retrieval function when you
want to get or offer research information?
Q11: How much of a burden is it to register research
information?

Table 3. System Evaluation
Question
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11
Q12

Average
4.14
3.71
3.95
3.24
3.67
4.14
3.71
3.76
3.33
4.14
2.62
3.71

Standard Deviation
0.65
0.96
1.16
1.14
1.28
1.01
0.85
0.94
1.06
1.11
1.36
0.90

The survey results – the average response and
standard deviation for each question based on the five-

177

point Likert scale (5=very good; 1=not good at all) – are
shown in Table 3.
High scores were obtained for all of the questions,
except question 11, indicating that the system satisfied
the four stated requirements.
Regarding question 13, we obtained several
comments:
- the respondents could think of few ways to improve
LabChart
- the time needed to become used to LabChart
operation and how to register research information
was a nuisance, but otherwise LabChart had a
beneficial impact on research activities
- the system makes it easy to visually understand
research transitions
- it was easy to obtain information on others' research
- it was easy to share information on others' research
- it was easier to collaborate with other members.
- Initially, the registration of research information to
the system was bothersome, but it became less of a
burden once the user became used to the process
As these comments suggest, the users generally had
favorable opinions of the system.
The result of Question 14 is shown in Table 4. From
the result, we noticed that there was not inclination in the
preference of the users to the common views. This means
that our proposed method to prepare several common
views is useful.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science under a Grant-inAid for Scientific Research (B) (No.17300262) and by
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology, Japan under a Grant-in-Aid for Young
Scientists (B) (No.17700599).

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Table 4. Preference to Common Views
Common Views

the number of users

CV1

8

CV2

6

CV3

7

[6]

[7]
[8]

Conclusion

[9]

We have described a support system for
collaborative
research
activities
in
university
laboratories. The system can solve the trade-off between
the need to manage research information from personal
viewpoints and the benefits of mutual sharing among
colleagues within an organization. Specifically, we have
created an RITG that enables research information to be
managed based on personal viewpoints. In addition, we
have developed a method for converting an RITG into a
common view to enable mutual sharing with unified
viewpoints. Such a system to support collaborative
research activities has been developed and implemented
based on our methods. Furthermore this paper described
the results of the system evaluation through application
of it, and provided the usefulness of the system.
In our future work, we plan to develop several
additional common views converted from an RITG to
supplement the one common view pattern we have
developed so far.

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

178

Umeda K., Yasuda, T., Yokoi, S., Proposal of a Research
Information Sharing System Utilizing KnowledgeMemos, IPSJ J., Vol.42, No.11, pp. 2562-2571, 2001.
Smolnik, S., Erdmann, I., Visual Navigation of
Distributed Knowledge Structures in Groupware-Based
Organizational Memories, Proc. IEEE Sixth International
Conference on Information Visualization (IV'02), pp.
353-360, 2002.
Tanabe, S., Oyobe, K., Sunaoka, N., Yokoyama, S.,
Miyadera, Y., A Visualization System of Relationships
among Papers Based on the Graph Drawing Problem,
Proc. IEEE Sixth International Conference on
Information Visualization (IV'02), pp. 202-210, 2002.
Guillermo Rodriguez-Ortiz, Knowledge Management
and Quality Certification in a Research and Development
Environment, Proc. Fourth Mexican International
Conference on Computer Science, IEEECS Press, pp. 8994, 2003.
Nakakoji, K., Yamamoto, Y., Knowledgen Interaction
Design for Creative Knowledge Work, Trans. JSAI,
Vol.19, No.2, pp.154-165, 2004.
O'Neill,D.K. and Gomez,L.M, The Collaboratory
Notebook : Supporting collaborative scientific inquiry,
Proc.the NECC94，pp.146-152，1994．
Oshima,J., Students' Construction of Scientific
Explanations in a Collaborative Hyper Media Learning
Environment, Proc.CSCL97, pp.187-197, 1997.
Akihiko Takano, Shingo Nishioka et al., Development of
the generic association engine for processing large
corpora, 2001. (http://geta.ex.nii.ac.jp/)
Stefan Smolnik,Ingo Erdmann, Visual Navigation of
Distributed Knowledge Structures in Groupware-Based
Organizational Memories, IEEE Proc. Information
Visualization (IV02) ,pp.353-360, 2002.
Julia Ahlers, Henrik Weimer, Challenges in Interactive
Visualization for Knowledge Management, IEEE
Proc.Information Visualization (IV02), pp.367-374,
2002.
B. Ramesh, Process Knowledge Management with
Traceability, IEEE Software, Vol.19, No.3, pp.50-52,
2002.
M. Ettorre, L. Pontieri, M. Ruffolo, P. Rullo, D. Sacca, A
Prototypal Environment for Collaborative Work within a
Research Organization, Proc. the 14th International
Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications
(DEXA’03), 2003.
Youzou Miyadera, Shoichi Nakamura, Takeo Yaku,
Setsuo Yokoyama, Personal Management and Sharing
of Reaearch Information using Research Information
Transition Graphs, J. IEICE, Vol.Vol.J91-D, No.3,
pp.639-653, 2008.

