12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Optimal font size for Head-Mounted-Displays in outdoor applications
Helge Renkewitz, Verena Kinder, Mario Brandt, Thomas Alexander
Research Institute for Communication, Information Processing, and Ergonomics,
Neuenahrer Strasse 20
53343 Wachtberg, Germany
{renkewitz, kinder, brandt, alexander@fgan.de}
an ergonomic HCI for outdoor applications the adequate
consideration of these characteristics is essential.
For displaying textual information the optimal font
size is a core question; especially while using Head
Mounted Displays (HMD) for outdoor systems. One
advantage of HMDs is certainly the fact that the
information can be displayed without the user holding
the corresponding display. Thus, all manual freedom of a
user is guaranteed. But the effect of different font colours
and especially altering backgrounds in outdoor ARsystems has to be estimated.
Previous experiments concerning font style and
background textures show a significant influence on text
readability [1, 2]. In addition, low reading times were
found for billboard text styles with green font colour. On
the other hand, red fonts reduced reading performance.
But the experiments used a fixed font size and focused
on different text styles and varying backgrounds.
Another shortcoming of the study is the intentional focus
on nonsense words because the participants should only
read the displayed words; the semantic context was not
regarded.
A further analysis indicates that there is no
functional difference between displaying information on
a Head-Mounted-Display and a desktop monitor [9].
Consequently, the recommended font size for desktop
applications is usable for HMDs as well. According to
ISO 9241-8 a symbol height of 20‘(arc minutes) is
required to ensure the recognition of a symbol chain [6].
This corresponds to a font size of 10pt for a distance of
60cm between eye and display.
However, there are no recommendations for optimal
font sizes for outdoor HMD-systems. This requires a
special psychophysical method for determining the
perceptual threshold. It is hypothesized that font colour
and background textures affect the font size. In contrast
to the related works the described approach uses a videosee-through system. This was chosen in order to reflect
most AR systems utilizing this technology.

Abstract
Modern mobile IT-systems offer a great potential for
various applications and enable a user to work
autonomously, to communicate or to retrieve information
nearly everywhere. However, displaying information
outdoors is still challenging for the system designer.
Numerous approaches of Augmented Reality (AR) tend to
integrate additional information into the real context of
the user's environment. Using this technology outdoors is
strongly affected by special environmental conditions
like lighting and background textures. These factors
differ substantially from indoor and are likely to reduce
the recognizing and reading performance, which is
important in combination with different font colours.
This paper presents an empirical analysis of the
influence of background texture and font colour on text
recognition performance. N=20 participants took part in
the experiments. The results clearly show significant
differences to the standards for desktop systems (10pt).
Applying the resulting font sizes for outdoor systems will
drastically reduce the amount of information that can be
displayed.
Keywords--- Head-Mounted-Displays, Human
Computer Interaction, outdoor Augmented Reality,

1. Introduction
Mobility has become an important topic in many
perspectives. Computers have become portable and
mobile nowadays. They facilitate a distributed, locationindependent information access for many applications.
But using computers outdoors leads to high demands on
the display technology. Environmental outdoor
conditions, e.g. varying lighting conditions (day, night,
sunlight, etc.) conditions and altering background
textures (sky, vegetation, building, etc.), differ from
standard desktop workplaces. Therefore, information
access and visualization are challenging issues for
Human Computer Interaction (HCI). In order to design

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.73

503

An alternative with fewer repetitions is the use of an
adaptive staircase method [8]. In this case, stimuli
intensity is modified according to the response of the
participant. If the rating is correct intensity is reduced
and if the rating is incorrect intensity is increased.
For this experiment an adaptive staircase method
with two interleaved staircases was applied. In this case
an ascending and a descending staircase are processed at
the same time. This way performance can be measured
objectively [7].

2. Methodology
The methodology is divided into two parts. First, the
interaction between font colour and background texture
is being analysed via a psychophysical approach. Then,
the identified thresholds for the font size are used for
statistical evaluations (ANOVA), which compare or
approximate the influence of the defined variables on the
font size. For the experiments described below both
factors are systematically varied. The lighting conditions
can hardly be influenced for outdoor settings so the
illumination intensity is not altered but only measured
and tried to keep it constant.

2.2. Hypothesis
In practical outdoor applications font colour is often
used to encode additional information. As a matter of
fact, the human sensitivity for different colours varies so
that colour influences the readability of text. But using
blue for the visualisation of information turns out to be
problematic for the human visual system because its
sensitivity for short wave light is considerably lower.
Blue contributes only 11% of the luminance which
means that the human visual system processes blue
stimuli less efficient than other colours. Thus, using
saturated blue for displaying objects smaller than 2°
should be avoided [6]. Red on the other hand has a
higher wavelength and so stimulates more of the human
visual system [4]. There is also an interrelationship
between font colour and background texture. Hence,
hypothesis H1 can be derived:

2.1. Psychophysics
The scientific study of the relationship between
stimulus and sensation is called psychophysics [3]. It
describes methodologies and procedures for measuring
perceptive threshold. The term „threshold” refers to the
point of intensity at which the participant can detect the
presence of a stimulus. The transition between nonsensation and sensation of a stimulus is described by the
so called psychophysical function. It is modelled by a
cumulative Gaussian distribution. This distribution shape
is characterized by two values: The Point of Subjective
Equality (PSE) and the Just Noticeable Difference
(JND). The PSE is the mean of the distribution and
characterizes the central trend. More important for the
subject’s discrimination performance is the JND which
describes the width of the psychophysical function
between the PSE and the 25th percentile.

H1: Font colour and background texture influence
the recognition rate for different font sizes.
But recognition rate is just one measurement of
recognition performance. It correlates with recognition
time. Consequently, H2 is derived and takes the effects
of both factors together into account. It is:

100
90
recognition rate (%)

80
70
60

H2: Font colour and background texture influence
the recognition time for different font sizes.

50
40

By considering both aspects, recognition rate and
recognition time, a comprehensive estimation of the
effects of both outdoor factors on the performance is
achieved.

30
20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

2.3. Independent Variables

font size (pt)

According to the hypotheses of the previous section,
font colour and background texture are the independent
variables of the further experiment.
The colours used for the experiments were set to
blue and red with the corresponding RGB-values (0, 0,
255) and (255, 0, 0). This is based on the different
sensitivity mentioned in the hypothesis section. Red and
blue are both relatively dark colours so that a bright wall
(e.g. concrete) offers a sufficient contrast. In particular,
the distance in colour space is an adequate measure to
determine the difference of analysed colours in the
experiments. A low colour distance can be found for

Figure 1: Individual psychophysical function of a
subject for font size recognition.
For determining each subject’s individual
psychophysical function, different procedures are
applicable [10]. Subjects report if he or she perceives a
stimulus or stimulus difference. Psychophysical methods
generally require a lot of repetitions so that a
representative frequency distribution is obtained. It is the
basis for fitting the cumulative Gaussian distribution by
regression analysis.

504

both red and blue when a greenish background (e.g. in a
forestal environment) is chosen. Thus, a bright wall with
an even background structure and a bush with a disturbed
background structure were selected as experimental
conditions. Table 1 assembles the independent
experimental variables.
Font Colour (with repetition)

2

{red, blue}

Background (with repetitions)

2

{bush, wall}

Previous experiments used artificial, non-sense
words like A4KGCZS [1, 2]. This reduced the task to the
distinction between the numbers 4, 5 and 6. Obviously, it
required a distinction between three numbers and not
words. This is not complicated, especially when
considering the strong visual differences of the chosen
numbers.
Thus, similar words were selected and presented to
the participants in preliminary experiments. But it
became obvious that the chosen words were too easy to
differentiate because other characteristics like, e.g.,
shape or length helped to identify the words. Therefore,
the response word set required stricter constraints to
ensure that the participants had to read and recognize the
word (semantic) rather then its shape or length. The
following conditions for a response word set were given:

Table 1: Independent variables for the experiment
To avoid order effects caused by learning or fatigue
four groups of test persons were built. All 4 possible
sequences of the 2x2 variables were prepared and
presented to the different groups. In contrast to the
independent variables this order is an experimental factor
without repetitions.

•
•
•
•
•
•

2.4. Dependent Variables
For quantifying performance accuracy (recognition
rate) as well as speed (recognition time) have to be
considered. A comprehensive analysis has to take both
factors into account.
Recognition rate was used to determine perceptual
threshold values for text recognition. The method
followed the psychophysical method described in section
2.1. Subsequently, a cumulative normal distribution was
fitted to the measured, original recognition rates for
different font sizes. The distribution was characterized
by PSE (central tendency) and JND (distribution), which
served as dependent variables for the further inferential
statistics analysis.
The mean values of the relative response time for
every single font sizes were calculated. This was done
for each participant and each experimental condition.
recognition rate

in % (0-100), PSE, JND

response time

in milliseconds (msec)

Initial letter or syllable are identical
Terminal letter or syllable identical
Similar length, same number of syllables
Not to long words (1 or 2 syllables)
Only one or two letters different than the original
Same word class (noun, verb, adjective)

Based on these constraints the word set for the
experiments was generated. One example for such a
word set is: long, lang, lomg, lung.

2.7. Apparatus
All experiments were conducted with a stationary
outdoor AR-system. A stationary setup was chosen to
ensure similar lighting conditions for each participant.
The additional text information was integrated into a live
camera video stream and presented in a HMD with a
resolution of 800x600. The interaction - selecting the
correct word from the response word set - was handled
by a standard game controller. Figure 2 shows the
experimental system setup.
Text

Grabber

Table 2: Dependent Variables

camera

2.5. Participants

Application

Twenty participants (12 male, 8 female, age: 29.3+/4.497) took part in the experiment. All participants were
native speakers. They were normal sighted or wore
correcting glasses. Four groups of five persons were
randomly created for balancing order effects.

Text

2.6. Corpus of words
Figure 2: Diagram of the data fusion for the
experimental outdoor system

For determining the recognition rate of a word, the
single word is displayed at first. Subsequently, a word
out of a list of four possible responses is selected. The
selection of presented word and set of suggestions
requires additional attention prior to the experiment.

505

2.8. Procedure

blue
text,
wall

The experiment was divided into 4 single cycles. For
each cycle a special combination of font colour and
background was presented. A cycle consisted of exercise
and four staircase trials. Each experiment was conducted
at the same outdoor place.
The line of sight was "fixed" because the
participants focus a single target. An L-shaped marker
was used for the fixation in a way that one corner of the
display had to be congruent with this marker. By this it
was guaranteed that the background for one trial is
identical.
In the following actual trial a single word was
displayed on the HMD (question mode). The participant
recognized, read and memorized the word. By pushing a
button the participant continued the task and ended the
display of the word. Afterwards, the response word set (4
words) was presented and the participant chose the
answer by pressing one out of four buttons on a
controller. Figure 3 shows the question mode on the left
and the response word set on the right.

red text,
wall

blue text,
bush

red text,
bush

PSE
[pt]

8.310

8.135

8.585

9.045

JND
[pt]

0.680

0.720

0.785

0.730

Table 3: Mean PSE and JND for the font sizes
An statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed
no order effect for the PSEs because no significant
differences between the four groups were found
(F3,16=0.5, p=0.69). Thus, neither learning nor fatigue
effects exist. Furthermore, no significant differences for
the recognition rate depending on the font colours could
be determined (F1,16=0.73, p=0.41). The same statement
can be made about the differences for both backgrounds
(F1,16=0.56, p=0.23). Finally, even the interaction
between font colour and background revealed no
significant difference (F3,16=0.71, p=0.56).
10

Font Size

9

8

Figure 3: Question mode with centred word (left) and
the response word set with 4 answers (right)
The correct answer was always included into the
word set. As soon as a button was pushed another word
was displayed which had to be recognized and later
selected out of another word set. This procedure was
repeated until the font size converged to a certain value.

7
Blue Font,
Wall

Red Font,
Wall

Blue Font,
Bush

Red Font,
Bush

Figure 4: Mean PSE and standard error
Similar results were found for the JNDs. No order
effect could be detected (F3,16=0.63, p=0.60). And the
differences between font colours (F1,16=0.01, p=0.91),
both backgrounds (F1,16=0.12, p=0.73) and their
interaction (F3,16=0.24, p=0.63) were also not significant.

3. Results
In the outdoor experiments the recognition rates and
the response times of font colours and different
backgrounds (blue text on bright wall, red text on bright
wall, blue text on bush, red text on bush) of the given
sequences were verified.

3.1. Recognition rate
For the recognition rate of the font size the
following mean PSEs and JNDs were found:

506

1

4. Discussion
Font colour and background texture do not affect
recognition rate. This result disproves the assumption
that blue text causes reduced readability. Furthermore,
the missing effect of background texture on recognition
rate contradicts the results of other experiments [1, 2].
On the other hand, the mentioned experiments analyzed
the effects of text drawing styles on the readability with
respect to the background and did not vary the text
colours. Subjective statements given by the participants
directly after the trials also hinted an influence of the
background. However, the results of the statistical
analysis of recognition rate conclude that font size
recommendations for desktop systems can also be
applied for HMDs. Hence, a font size of 9 or 10pt is
preferable [6]. Based on the subjective statements a more
detailed review of the recognition time was necessary.
The second performance analysis referred to
recognition time. A critical review of the results of this
analysis puts the recommendation of 9pt into
perspective. The black vertical line in figure 6 illustrates
the identified PSE for the font size (9pt). However, a
striking fact is the difference between the four conditions
in this region: Each recognition time is larger than 7
seconds (blue text on wall: 7.1s, red text on wall: 7.4s,
red text on bush: 10.2s, blue text on bush: 12.8s).
Consequently, the recognition time for the bush
background is approximately 4.35s higher (38%) than for
the wall background.
Nevertheless, a recognition time of more than 7
seconds is definitely not sufficient for a fast reading of
information. Hence, a font size of 9pt is readable but it
takes too long.
The goal of the conducted experiments was to
determine an optimal font size for outdoor AR-systems.
A reasonable recognition time for information should be
around 2s which was determined as a practical response
time in preliminary experiments. Figure 7 shows the
corresponding font sizes for this additional requirement.

Font Size

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Blue Font,
Wall

Red Font,
Wall

Blue Font,
Bush

Red Font,
Bush

Figure 5: Mean JND and standard error
A PSE as a value between definite recognition and
certainly not perceivable was identified with 8.52pt. The
derived JND value of 0.73 is also considerably low
which impressively shows the capability of the human
visual system. Taking both values into account results in
font size of 9.25pt for a 75% probability of recognition.
Thus, the visual recognition rate on a HMD corresponds
to that of a desktop display [4].

3.2. Response time
A regression analysis shows a functional interaction
between the mean recognition time and the font size for
all conditions: Small fonts required long recognition
times. With increasing font size the recognition time
rapidly decreases until a font size of about 15pt. For the
maximum font size a corresponding response time of less
than 2 seconds is identified.
Another interesting result is the fact that the
response times for the wall background are lower than
for the bush background. Figure 6 shows an aggregated
diagram of the results for the recognition time.
40

PSE font size
Potential (red/bush)
Potential (blue/bush)
Potential (blue/wall)
Potential (red/wall)

30

5
Line of 2 sec recognition
Potential (red/bush)
Potential (blue/bush)
Potential (blue/wall)
Potential (red/wall)

4,5
4

25

mean recognition time (sec)

mean recognition time (sec)

35

20
15
10
5

3,5
3
2,5
2
1,5
1

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

0,5

font size (pt)

0

Figure 6: Font size and mean recognition time
(potential regression function for each condition)

18

23

28

33

38

43

48

font size (pt)

Figure 7: Font size and mean recognition times below
2 seconds

507

Based on this diagram the corresponding font sizes
in table 4 are derived which guarantee not only a
readability but also a fast recognition time of 2 seconds.
blue
text,
wall

red
text,
wall

blue
text,
bush

font size in
pt for
minimal 2s
recognition

> 23 pt

> 42 pt

> 34 pt

>29 pt

font size in
degrees for
minimal 2s
recognition

> 0.92°

> 1.68°

> 1.36°

> 1.18°

on text legibility in outdoor augmented reality. Presence:
Teleoper. Virtual Environments 15, pp. 16-32. 2006.
[3] Gescheider, G.A. Psychophysics: The fundamentals.
Erlbaum: Mahwah, NJ. 1997.
[4] Goldstein, E.B. Sensation and Perception, 6th edition,
Wadsworth, Belmont CA, 2002.
[5] Gupta, D. An Empirical Study of the Effects of ContextSwitch, Object Distance, and Focus Depth on Human
Performance in Augmented Reality, Master Thesis,
Virginia Tech., Blacksburg, VA. 2004.
[6] ISO 9241-8:1997 Ergonomic requirements for office
work with visual display terminals (VDTs) -- Part 8:
Requirements for displayed colours.
[7] Leek, M.R. Adaptive procedures in psychophysical
research. In: Perception & Psychophysics 63 (8), S.12791292. 2001.
[8] Levitt, H. Transformed Up-Down Methods in
Psychoacoustics. Journal of the Acoustic Society of
America, Vol. 49, 1971. pp 467-477. 1971.
[9] Peli, E. The visual effects of head-mounted display
(HMD) are not distinguishable from those of desktop
computer display, Vision Research, Volume 38, Number
13, pp. 2053-2066(14). 1998.
[10] Woodworth, R.S., Schlossberg, H. Experimental
Psychology. Methuen & Co. London. 1966.

red
text,
bush

Table 5: Font sizes for all conditions with a minimal
recognition time of 2 seconds
Considering the font colour for this temporal
constraint no explicit statement can be made because the
results for the different backgrounds are different. Thus,
a blue font colour should be used for the concrete, even
wall and red is preferable the green, disturbed
background.

5. Conclusion
The experiments and analyses described in this
paper focused on the recommended font sizes for HMDsystems. It was analyzed whether recommendations and
standards for desktop systems can be applied without
modification for outdoor AR-system.
An empirical approach was presented determined
perceptual thresholds for font size. Subsequently, the
influence of the font colour and background texture on
the font size was analyzed. According to this, text with a
font size of 9pt (for a distance of 60cm) was found to be
reliably recognizable for this outdoor setting. But the
corresponding recognition times of 7 to 13 seconds are
not reasonable for a practical application.
It was shown that limiting the recognition time to 2
seconds led to font sizes of 23pt and higher to guarantee
a reliable readability of displayed information. This
significantly reduces the amount of information that can
be displayed on a HMD. Thus it puts high demands on
the overall semantic design of the user interface.

References
[1]

[2]

Gabbard, J.L., Swan II, J.E., Hix, D., Schulman, R.S.,
Lucas, J., Gupta, D. An empirical user-based study of
text drawing styles and outdoor background textures for
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the IEEE VR 2005
Conference, Bonn, Germany, pp. 11-18. 2005.
Gabbard, J.L., Swan, J.E., Hix, D. The effects of text
drawing styles, background textures, and natural lighting

508

