12th International Conference Information Visualisation

A Visualization Model for Information Resources Management
1

Zhou Ning1, Wu Jiaxin1, Wang Bing2, Zhang Shaolong1
Research Center for Information Resources, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072 China
2
Computer Science Department, University of Hull, Hull,HU6 7RX UK
(n_zhouwhu@yahoo.com.cn)
InfoVisModel visualization prototype can process up
to 10 000 information targets. More specifically speaking,
there are 3600 text based journal thesis, 1700 images
indexing and 4700 audio. Thesis data by half-automatic
collecting method were collected from China Journal Net1;
audio data by web crawler were collected automatically
from Yahoo2 music library and image data by crawling
program were collected from Baidu3 image library.
InforVisModel
system
divides
information
visualization into five modules (see figure 2): Its theme
animation is displayed in five images.

Abstract
In general, digital information resources can be
categorized into three categories, text, voice (audio) and
image (video). This article discusses a theoretical method
of information visualization system and its corresponding
technologies. The system is the results of the project
(70473068) supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China. The paper specifically discusses
constructing
strategy
of
visualization
model,
environmental configuration, functional module and
operation method of prototype system. What’s more, it
further discusses construction of text, voice (audio) and
image information visualization model, data preparation
and data scale, operation interface and running result.
The research represented is firstly a helpful attempt in
studying visualization model of general information
resources management with certain experience achieved,
and secondly, it also explored a road to success in terms
of visualization of information in Chinese.
Keywords visual model; model method; information
resources management;

1.ȱIntroductionȱ
InforVisModel visualization prototype system is the
result of the research project (70473068) “Visualization
Model Research of Digitized Information Resources
Management” supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation. InforVisModel has successfully implemented
the construction of visualization model for text, audio and
image respectively, through investigating and analyzing
various visualization models, and realized visualization
retrieval of text, audio and image by its application. The
system interface is shown in figure 1.

Fig.2

(1) Text retrieval (See Aĺ): text information
visualization module includes collecting, indexing,
retrieving text information, generating visualization data
of text information and displaying visualization interface
of text information etc.;
(2) Audio retrieval (See Bĺ): audio information
visualization module includes collecting, indexing,
retrieving audio information, generating visualization
data of text information and displaying visualization
interface of audio information etc.;
(3) Image retrieval (See Cĺ): image information
visualization module includes collecting, indexing,
retrieving image information, generating visualization
data of text information and displaying visualization
interface of image information etc.;
(4) System introduction (See Dĺ): give an overall
introduction to the prototype system
(5) System demonstration (See Eĺ): automatic
demonstration of system in image, text and voice media.

Fig.1 HomePage animation

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.105

HomePage layout

57

Windows XP SP2, Web server Apache Tomcat 5.5 and
supporting environment Java running environment JRE
1.5.
Hardware configuration: processor is Inter Celeron
CPU 1.80G, Memory 256M.

2ˊConstructingȱVisualizationȱModelȱ
According to reference model and the goal4 of
information visualization, the construction may be
conducted into three steps:
(1) Data preparation: i.e. determine and acquire original
data of visualization and form original data space;
(2) Data analysis and extraction: i.e. analyze and extract
visualization data needed from original data and form
visualization data space;
(3) Visualization mapping: i.e. employ certain mapping
algorithm to map visualization data space to visualization
target.
However, in order to form original data space, it is
necessary to acquire other data sources (including
databases such as CNKI database, WWW such as search
engine) to get original data sources for forming this
system, and collection and indexing of information are
needed. Therefore, InforVisModel divide the construction
into five steps:
(1) Information collection: to collect information
resources needed from databases or WWW;
(2) Information indexing: to index collected information
resources to form original data sources;
(3) Information retrieval: to query information lists in
conformity to result from original data sources according
to the need of retrieval;
(4) Generation of visualization data: to transform data in
the retrieved results into visualization data; and
(5) Display of visualization interface: to map
visualization data to visualization target and display them
on visualization interface.
InfoVisModel visualization model is shown in figure 3.

3.2 Selection of system tool
InfoVisModel visualization prototype system adopted
the popular B/S mode. The entire developing process
used powerful free open-source integrated developing
environment Eclipse platform. Information indexing and
retrieval were completed by Lucene toolkit. Visualization
function was realized by open-source Prefuse and Char2D
Java toolki. XML sealing and analyzing used Dom4j
toolkit.

Eclipse

Eclipse5 is a Java program developing framework that
was donated by IBM to developing source code
community. It is free and source-code developed. Besides,
Eclipse has boundless extensibility as products of
different developers may be integrated at this platform.
The reasons why InfoVisModel used Eclipse as
developing platform are that it is free and open-source,
applicable to research project, and on the other hand, that
it has powerful extensibility with many open-source
plug-ins for realizing related functions.

Lucene

Lucene6 is an open-source full-text information
retrieval development package compiled by Java
language. API of Lucene is simple, easy to use, but with
powerful function. It can realize indexing and analyzing
functions including fuzz query and query by group. Its
structure is clear. It is easy to learn and be expanded.
Indexing file format is independent of application
platform and can be shared across platforms. It can fulfill
document indexing of various formats including Web,
Word and PDF. Lucene mainly uses IndexSearcher, Term,
Query, TermQuery and Hits to execute related operation.
InfoVisModel system used Lucene as retrieving and
indexing tool to make its extensibility more powerful.
Indexing and retrieval of images, audios, text information
in InfoVisModel are all completed through Lucene.

Dom4j

Dom4j7 is an open-source XML parsing package. It
is a very excellent Java XML API, featuring superior
performance, powerful function and easiness to use.
Initially Dom4j was a branch of JDOM. It integrated
many functions exceeding basic XML document
expression including integrated XPath support, XML
Schema support and event-based process used in large or
Fig. 3 Form the process
flow documents. Dom4j uses interface and abstract
InfoVisModel visualization model
method. It uses large quantity of Collection category in
API, but it also provides some substituting methods to
allow better performance or more direct encoding method.
3ˊSystemȱEnvironmentȱConfigurationȱandȱ ȱ ȱ ȱAlthough
ȱ ȱ ȱ ȱ ȱ API of Dom4j is more complicated, it offers
much more flexibility than JDOM does. Dom4j is easy to
use as a basic understanding of XML-DOM model will
ToolȱSelectionȱ
be sufficient for use. What’s more, its performance is
outstanding. Therefore, Dom4j was used to seal and parse
3.1 Running Environment of InfoVisModel
XML document in InfoVisModel system.
Software configuration: operation system uses

Tomcat

58

Tomcat8 server is a free open-source code Web
application server. It is a core project in Jakarta projects
of Apache software foundation, jointly developed by
Apache, Sun and other companies and individuals.
Running of Tomcat occupies little system resource with
good extensibility, supporting functions generally used in
developing application system such as loading balance
and mail service. Tomcat belongs to small-sized light
application server and is generally used in small and
medium-sized system and occasions with fewer
concurrent accessing users. For InfoVisModel prototype
system, functions and performance of Tomcat is sufficient.
Therefore, Tomcat was used to erect Web application
server based on B/S.

of keywords association visualization is that there is
relationship among indexed keywords in the same
literature and a network formed by keywords of several
literatures in certain field represents the knowledge
structure of this subject, and that the essence of
association words visualization is to reveal knowledge
structure through the relationship between keywords. And
the relationship of keywords is determined on the basis of
word co-occurrence principle. Keywords distribution
visualization is to put literatures with the same indexing
keywords into one hieratical structure to form a
tree-structure, in which tree structure used filling tree –
Treemap for fulfillment. Not only hieratical structure
relationship was given, but also other quantitative indexes
such as literature of the same keywords were also
reflected. The essence of keywords visualization is to
reveal the relationship between keywords and literature to
gather related literatures with the same keywords.
Chronological distribution histogram of thesis displayed
numbers of published thesis in different years in the
research field corresponding to queried words, thus
vividly analyzing whether this field may be a research
focus or a mature research field etc.
Text information visualization interface includes five
parts (overall interface of text information retrieving
visualization is shown in figure 4):

4ˊVisualizationȱModelȱofȱTextȱ
Informationȱ
Construction
process
of
text
information
visualization model in InforVisModel system is as
follows: The model realized automatic/half-automatic
collection of text information. Collected text information
was provided to indexing module in XML form. Text
indexing module generated text indexing database i.e.
original text data source of prototype system through
establishing indexing in source text XML base. After user
submitted retrieval type, text information retrieval module
search documents matching the demand in the indexing
database. Text information visualization data generation
module will generate two XML documents9 from key
words information in retrieval list. Key words distributed
XML and key words association XML, visualization data
support for visualization displaying module of text
information was provided. Text information visualization
interface not only displayed keywords distribution map,
keywords relevance diagram, chronological distribution
histogram of thesis, but also gave related retrieving lists
and other information of retrieving results.
Therefore, visualization model of text information
mainly used XML as interface of data transformation.
Final result of original text information collection was
submitted in XML document while visualization data
used XML interface provided by Prefuse. Usage of XML
as data interface may increase extensibility of system. For
example, the system may accept data from other text
information sources as long as these text information
sources may be transformed into system-defined source
text XML format. The system can then make it automatic
indexing to add to indexing database and become original
data source of this system. Visualization data format
based on XML can better meet the demand of various
visualization displaying forms such as various
point-linear, filling, tree structures.
Text information visualization mainly realized
visualization of keywords association and distribution by
utilizing RadialGraphView and Treemap provided by
Prefuse and Histogram offered by Char2D. The principle

Fig.4

Text information visualization interface

(1) Query input textbox
User inputs keywords in this textbox to submit for
query by pressing enter or clicking. If user inputs
“information visualization”, this input will be parsed as
query character string and Lucene will take the string as
the input to index and generate result lists and extract
information from result lists at the same time, keywords
relationship XML, keywords distribution XML and
chronological distribution frequency data of literature
respectively. Finally it is displayed to the user in a
visualization way.

59

width is determined by the number of leaf node in the
descendent of this node child tree.
Besides drawing each node and side statically,
Radial Graph also supports dynamic interaction. When
the node changes the visualization map will change
dynamically. User will see the changing process of map
instead of another static map.
Radial Graph View can not only display keywords of
each thesis in the query result, but also relationship
between
keywords.
Through
displaying
these
relationships, user’s thought may be extended so that
correlation of different fields and closely related fields
may be found out, and the user may have an all-round
knowledge on keywords-related fields. What’s more, it
may help user to find new query words, playing a role in
keywords recommendation. Through restricting more
keywords, the query scope is reduced. Dynamic
interaction of Radial Graph View can make the user to
focus on the present node and dynamically and gradually
find the change of keywords relevance.
(4) TreeMap
This map is generated by Applet and takes
kwDistribution.xml as data input. It reflects literature
distribution frequency of each keyword. If “information
visualization” appeared in eight articles in a query result,
its frequency is 8. TreeMap can vividly display how many
theses each keyword has appeared on the present page,
which is favorable to observing the distribution
characteristics of keywords and discovering the popular
degree of the keyword-corresponding research field. Take
“information visualization” query result as an example, 9
articles were found out, 8 were contained on the first page.
Its keyword distribution TreeMap is shown in figure 4 (4).
Because each article contains the keywords “information
visualization”, there were also 8 rectangular frames
corresponding to information visualization. The keywords
“Method Study” appeared in 2 articles, so there are only 2
frames corresponding to the keywords.
(5) Retrieval targeting result frame
If there are many targeted results, it can be managed
by the page. Page number is listed under this frame.
Needed page may be chosen freely according to the need.
A click will immediately open the needed page showing
the result lists of this part.

(2) Visualization map of literature publishing time
This map is generated by an Applet (Histogram
class). This Applet calls Chart 2D.jar which is a toolkit
used in performing 2D visualization. It can conveniently
draw histogram, dot graph, linear graph and pie etc. In
order to generate trend map, it is needed to input literature
frequency counted in collection of literature in query
result. Use “information visualization” as query character
string and finally 9 theses are targeted, while datastring
corresponding to histogram is ““0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,3,1,4,1”,
and its corresponding histogram is shown at the up right
part in figure 4.
In the figure, the ordinate represents thesis numbers
and the abscissa stands for different years. The literature
publishing time visualization map, besides histogram and
trend-line, includes distribution curve and distribution
surface (see the figure).
From the literature publishing time visualization
map, the rule of literature publishing according to time
can be clearly seen, which is conducive to analyzing and
querying
the
research
cycle
of
the
keywords-corresponding research field, whether it is a
hotspot and degree of being concerned in different times.
Therefore, it helps user to grasp characteristics and rules
of the research field in a macro way and provides
instructive suggestions for writing thesis and reading.
Take “information visualization “ as an example, the
result shows that publishing rate in 2005 was the highest,
which means 2005 witnessed the research hotspot, while
the heat decreased in 2006 as it can be seen that the peak
value has decreased and tending to be slow and flat from
the trend map.
(3) Radial Graph View
This view is generated by Applet with
kmRelation.xml as data input. It reflects the relevance
among keywords in the result collection of literature
query.
In Radial Graph, when clicking certain node, the
program will take the present node as the root and use
breadth traversal algorithm to do traversing with the
present node as the initial one, and then acquire
parent-child relationship among nodes to generate a tree.
Nodes in the tree are corresponding to the ones in the map.
Each node in the tree (except the root node) takes one of
its neighbors in the map as parent node. When displaying
the generated tree, “Radial drawing” method is used to
draw. Each node is aligned on several rings that have root
node as the centre. The depth at which the node is
determines which ring the node is on. The deeper it is, the
farther it is away from root node (the present node) and
the farther ring it is away from the root.
For Radial Graph, with the present node as the
centre, divergence map expanding to the outside may be
divided into several sectors. The location where each
node on the ring is determined by the sector assigned to
this node by this ring. Each node is located in the sector
of its parent node, while the opening angle of sector is
proportional to the angular width of the child-tree of this
node. This method is called “Radial Placement”. Among
them, all the nodes are of the same size, and the angular

5ˊVisualizationȱModelȱofȱAudioȱ
Informationȱ
Construction process of InfoVisModel system audio
information visualization model is as follows: collection
of audio information was completed through crawler
crawling Yahoo music library and the collected audio
information was provided to audio information indexing
module in XML. The audio indexing module established
indexing of source audio XML library and generated
audio indexing database, i.e. audio original data source of
prototype system. After user submitted retrieval type

60

through retrieval interface, audio information retrieval
module searched audio information matching the demand
in the indexing database. The audio information
visualization data generation module used artist, name of
album and song etc. to generate music tree XML to
provide visualization data support for audio information
visualization displaying sub-module. Audio information
visualization not only displayed music map, but also gave
other information in the retrieval result.
Generation of music tree is based on artist, name of
album and song when people retrieve audio information
(here only music information is taken as the major
example). Through retrieving result, the hieratical
structure with the sequence of “artist-album-song” will be
generated. It provides not only the information in the
most concerning aspects provided but also the relevance
diagram among them and automatic categorization of
retrieving result is realized. Gathering works and albums
by the same artist is convenient for both related retrieving
and for people retrieving and using audio information.
Here visualization display of music tree was realized by
using TreeView in Prefuse10.
Audio information visualization interface contains
three parts (as is shown in figure 5):

Fig. 5

displayed. So the view can be restricted within effective
area and will not make the display space insufficient
because of huge depth of directory. Grade I directory of
music tree is name of singer, singers contained in the
targeted results; grade II directory is the album of this
sing; grade II directory is name of specific targeted song
belonging to certain album.
“Like” was used as
character string to make initialized map of music tree.
(3) Song lists
Display the retrieved songs in the form of list.
Information of each song includes name of singer, album
and name of song.

6ˊVisualizationȱModelȱofȱImageȱ ȱ ȱ ȱ ȱ
Informationȱ
Construction process of InfoVisModel system image
information visualization model is as follows: collection
of image information was mainly completed through
automatic crawling image library of Baidu search engine.
The collected image information was provided to image
information indexing sub-module in the form of XML.
Image indexing sub-module established indexing of
source image XML library and generated image indexing
database i.e. image original data source of prototype
system. After user submitted retrieving type through
retrieving interface, image information retrieval module
searched image information matching the demand in the
indexing database. Image information visualization data
generation module used information including image ID
and keywords generated image keywords association
XML and provided visualization data support for image
information visualization display sub-module. Image
information visualization interface not only displayed
image keywords relevance map, but also gave other
information in retrieving results.
Image keywords relevance map was mainly based on
the correlation among the marked keywords in image. It
associated keywords of many images, which is helpful for
user to search more proper keywords for further query.
Visualization display of image keywords relevance
diagram was realized by GraphView11 in Prefuse.
Visualization interface of image information contains
three parts (as is shown in figure 6):
(1) Query input textbox
User inputs keywords in this textbox to submit for
query by pressing enter or clicking. If user inputs “China
airship”, this input will be parsed as query character
string and Lucene will take the string as the input to index
image description and image keywords and generate
result lists of images. It will then output image
information and generate ImageGraph.xml used in
visualization display.
(2) Image – keywords relevance diagram
This is a visualization map generated on the basis of
data structure of map. The visualization model it adopts is
Force Directed Model. It is a visualization model based

Audio information Visualization interface

(1) Query input textbox
User inputs keywords in this textbox to submit for
query by pressing enter or clicking. If user inputs “love”,
this input will be parsed as query character string and
Lucene will take the string as the input to index the name
of the song and generate result lists of the song containing
“love”. It will then output song information and generate
MusicTree.xml for the use of visualization display.
(2) Music tree view
This view is a transverse tree directory. Under initial
state, 3 directories are displayed: root, grade I and grade
II directories. When user clicks certain directory, two
sub-directories of this directory will be dynamically

61

on physical method. This model regards each node as
particle and side between nodes as function of force or
repulsion force or attraction force. When mutual function
of force reaches balance, it becomes the final
visualization view. So, visualization view is a result of the
action of forces. From the perspective of aesthetics, when
forces are balanced, visualization display of view is the
most beautiful. Input “Shenzhou V” as query character
string, initialized effect of image-keywords relevance
diagram can be seen in figure 6. The keywords
“Shenzhou V” node is seated in the middle of the diagram.
Connect related images (integral ID node) through lines;
keywords representing these images all contain
“Shenzhou V”. It can be seen from the figure, that besides
“Shenzhou V”, the three key phrases “Shenzhou VI”,

Conclusionsȱ ȱ ȱ
To summarize, visualization model of information
resources management is divided into image, text and
audio for handling. They respectively experience the
three stages i.e. data preparation, data analyzing and
extraction and visualization mapping. The generation
process of this kind of visualization model has not only
provided method for construction visualization model of
general information resources management, but also
explored a road to success in visualization of information
resources in Chinese. And the completion of the study of
InfoVisModel prototype system has proved a successful
example.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China ˄ NSFC ˅ under Grant
70473068.

References
[1] http://www.cnki.org//index.htm
[2] http://audio.search.yahoo.com/
[3] http://image.baidu.com/
[4] Chaomei Chen. Mapping Scientific Frontiers: The Quest
Knowledge Visualization.
London:. Springer-Verlag 2003
28-29
[5] http://www.eclipse.org/
[6] http://lucene.apache.org/
[7] http://www.dom4j.org/
[8] http://tomcat.apache.org/
[9] Zhou Ning, Zhang Yufeng, Zhang Liyi. Information
Visualization and Knowledge Retrieval. Beijing: Science Press
2005 306-314
[10] http:// treeview.prefuse.org/
[11] http:// graphview.prefuse.org/

Fig. 6

Visualization interface of image information

“Shenzhou Airship” and “Yang Liwei” are all connected
to many images.
(3) Lists of image results
It shows results of images in the form of table,
attached with ID, width, length, memory size and format
of images.

62

