12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Web Mining for Open Source Intelligence
Clive Best
Joint Research Centre, European Commission (until March 31st 2008)
CEO, OSVision Ltd. (since April 2008)
{clive.best@gmail.com}
information derived from it can be shared with other
agencies and services of friendly countries.
The intelligence cycle is a process which begins
with a request for an intelligence study. This request
comes from a senior manager in a commercial company,
a minister of state, a military commander, or a director of
an intelligence agency. Firstly the task is planned and
information sources identified. A researcher or OSINF
specialist then collects relevant information using
specialized tools. The data is then indexed and processed
by extracting and tagging relevant metadata. The analyst
should be an expert in the relevant field with deep
understanding of the problem being addressed. The
analyst accesses the collected OSINF in order to author
the intelligence report. Intelligence is nearly always a
written document including imagery, maps etc where
relevant.

Abstract

Web Mining for Open Source Intelligence is the
retrieval, extraction and analysis of information from online Internet sites. There are two separate applications
areas this paper will review, namely live newsmonitoring and targeted topic based data mining. Most
newspapers and news agencies have web sites with live
updates on unfolding events, opinions and perspectives
on world events. Most governments monitor news reports
to feel the pulse of public opinion, and for early warning
of emerging crises. The Joint Research Centre has
developed significant experience in Internet content
monitoring through its work on media monitoring
(EMM) for the European Commission. EMM forms the
core of the Commission’s daily press monitoring service.
Intelligence services and law enforcement agencies also
require specific site monitoring and topic monitoring,
and EMM technology has been applied to the wider
Internet for this purpose. The software extracts and
downloads all the textual content from monitored sites
and applies information extraction techniques. These
tools help analysts process large amounts of documents
to derive structured data. Lastly the visualisation of the
extracted data is important for analysts to identify
patterns and trends derived from both news reports and
web mining.
Keywords: Web Mining, Information Extraction,
Multilinguality, Media Monitoring , Visualisation

1. Introduction
Figure 1: The OSINT Cycle

The term Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) [1]
originates from the security services and from law
enforcement agencies. It refers to intelligence derived
from publicly available sources of information, as
opposed to closed or classified sources. The last 10 years
have seen enormous growth in the OSINT area. Open
sources by definition are non-classified although a report
derived from pure open sources itself can become
classified. One main advantage of OSINT is that

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.86

2. Media Monitoring
Like most governmental and international
organizations, the European Union monitors media
reports concerning EU policies and potential threats. A
major challenge since 2004 for the EU has been the need
to handle some 25 different languages. The Europe
Media Monitor [2] was developed to meet that challenge

321

order to automatically deduce the top stories and derive
related information. In particular, keyword and entity
extraction from news, place name identification,
multilingual thesaurus indexing, and the recording of
EMM topic alerts allow the tracking of news topics
across time and language. A signature for each article is
then derived consisting of a weighted list of keywords
whose weights depend on their probability of occurrence
derived from a large corpus of articles in a given
language. The result of the keyword identification
process is thus a representation of each incoming news
article in a vector space. A bottom up clustering
algorithm based on the cosine similarity of two vectors is
applied to each set of articles in each language. A cutoff
distance is used to distinguish clusters and typically 150
clusters are found in English articles each day. The
number of articles in a cluster measures the size of the
story.
The text of all articles in a cluster is scanned for
occurrences of named entities recorded in a database.
This database of known entities is a growing resource
through a procedure for entity recognition using lexical
patterns. These are of two types. Firstly, “title” patterns
like “former president” and “Doctor” are identified.
Secondly, common first names in different languages
also trigger the name recognition algorithm.
Disambiguation rules are applied to help distinguish
between places and persons. A check is also made for
name variants of the same name using a fuzzy matching
procedure.
The cross-lingual linking of daily news clusters [5]
is based on the use of a multilingual thesaurus classifier,
and on language variants of places and entities. This
cross-language linking allows the tracking of relative
news coverage of the same story in different languages.
The daily cluster analysis has been running since early
2003, with continuous improvements. Today it is
performed in 19 languages including Russian, Farsi and
Arabic. There are usually 10-15 large clusters with over
5 members per major language, and many (over 100 in
English) small ones.

by scanning over 1500 web sites and 15 national news
agencies 24/7. About 35,000 articles are detected and
processed each day in over 30 languages. The full text of
each article is filtered against 10,000 multilingual
keyword combinations to sort each article into one or
more of 600 topic definitions. Alerts keep subscribers
informed of immediate updates on key subjects by email
and SMS. Each alert is a predefined combination of keywords conditions which describe one of the 600 topics.
However this doesn’t cover the unexpected “Breaking
News” story. For this purpose a real-time breaking news
system was developed which tracks the occurrence of
capitalized keywords across languages and can detect
sudden increases of existing keywords or the sudden
emergence of new keywords. The system is very
successful at quickly detecting major breaking news
stories. Since 2007 another parallel system performs real
time clustering of news which can track the growth of
stories with a 10 minute time step as shown in Figure 2.
EMM results are published through an automatically
generated NewsBrief, a public version of which can be
seen at http://press.jrc.it and through electronically edited
reviews which are distributed internally in the European
Commission.

2.1. Alert System
EMM’s Alert system drives most of the content and
adds value to the news monitored. The overall objective
is to process as rapidly as possible each discovered
article and decide which subjects (Alert definitions) are
mentioned. If an alert criterion is satisfied the article is
appended to a result RSS file [3], one for each alert
definition. The alert system keeps hourly statistics of the
number of articles detected for each Alert in the system.
This is stored in XML files accessible on the web server.
One file is recorded each day containing 24 hourly
values and when processed together they form long-term
time series of event statistics. As major events occur
their development is recorded in the statistics files.
Algorithms for breaking news detection in topics can
automatically alert people concerned.

3.1. Entity Tracking
A number of relationships can be identified between
individual entities over long time periods based on their
co-occurrence in articles. Firstly, all related news
clusters mentioning a given person can be identified, and
these can then be tracked back over long time periods.
Secondly, other persons and organizations mentioned
within the same news clusters can then be linked
together. One problem with blindly linking persons
mentioned in the same news article, is that certain
persons, for example George W Bush, tend to be
mentioned in many different contexts. Therefore a
method to enhance the most associated persons was
invented [6], which weights stronger those entities linked
with a single cluster, topic or person and suppresses
those entities with many co-occurrences with multiple
entities.

Figure 2: Story development with a 10 minute
update frequency

3. News Explorer
A more detailed analysis of daily news is performed
after midnight GMT [4]. All detected articles in each of
currently 19 languages are then processed together in

322

system based on machine learning has been developed
which can analyse phrases mentioning two entities [8].
This is based on a shallow parser which identifies the
verb phrase connecting two entities. First the algorithm
is seeded with an initial set of phrases, and then by
iterating over a cluster of similar articles, new patterns
are derived for inclusion. As a result of this process the
following direct relationship patterns have been
developed so far for English only:
• Contact: met, phoned, spoke, called etc.
• Support: concur, encouraged, agreed, etc.
• Criticise: slammed, accused, rejected etc
• Family: wife, son, mother, mistress etc.
A large volume of news articles can then be
analysed. There are two ways to derive these relationship
networks. Firstly, one can choose a single individual and
view the derived relationship links to other entities.
Figure 5 shows such a network for David Cameron.
Clearly such networks will evolve with time and in some
way can measure a person’s media based reputation.
Another way to visualize these relationship networks is
instead to focus on a single subject by analyzing only
articles which have triggered the corresponding alert. In
this way the network of contacts for that subject emerges
from the data.

A searchable index of all entities has also been
generated and is available through the website to find
any named identity and to visualize the derived
information. Identified name variants are displayed
together with most recent news topics, related and
associated persons (Figure 3). A social network can be
visualized showing these relationships graphically and
allows further navigation options to open further
relationships to identify common connections. The
searchable index also allows to locate any two or more
random entities and then to visualise whether these
entities are linked through common clusters. Figure 4
shows part of the automatically derived network for the
July 7th London Bombers.
A method of automatically recognizing quotes made
both by a person and those made by other people about
them has also been developed and is also presented along
with their profile pages [7].

Figure 3: Automatic Profile Generation

Figure 5: Derived network for David Cameron

3.3. Event Extraction
The goal of event extraction is to identify metadata
from textual descriptions to describe “Who does what to
whom, where, when and with what consequences”. The
initial work has focused on violent events logged
automatically from EMM harvested news articles. An
example best illustrates what is being tried to achieve.
“Suicide Blast hits security firm Kandahar, Afghanistan,
11 Sept. 2007 - A suicide bomber struck a U.S. security
firm convoy killing 3 people”. From this text the
following items can be extracted:
• Attacker: a suicide bomber
• Instrument: bomb
• Method: suicide bombing
• Target: u.s. security firm

Figure 4: Network of connections identified in
News Reports

3.2. Relation Extraction
A deeper analysis of the relationships between two
entities can be made by parsing and processing the
sentences in which they appear. A pattern matching

323

• Time: 11/9/2007
• Place Kandahar, Afghanistan
• Damage: 3 dead
An event extraction system called Nexus [9] has
been applied to the clusters of EMM. The basic idea is
that each cluster represents a single event. Nexus uses a
shallow parser and pattern matching derived from
machine learning. Each article in the cluster is analysed
to extract as much detail as possible about the event. This
same procedure is now being applied to the Real Time
clusters and thereby produces a live situation map interface (figure 6). This interface is updated round the clock
and automatically detects new violent events as they
occur. Each event is classified with an event description
and geolocated to the place most mentioned in the
articles, applying an additional spatial hierarchy logic
e.g. town, province, region, country. The elements of the
event description are: Event{Date, Place (Lat,Lon),
Event Type, Number killed, Number Wounded, Number
Kidnapped, Perpetrators, Victims, Weapons}.
Logging of violent events over long periods of time
can monitor a crisis in a systematic way and help
decision makers gauge whether a situation is worsening
or improving.

has been developed for visualization through Google
Earth.

3.5. News Maps
News Maps [11] are intended to show country hot
spots for thematic news in analogy to Weather maps.
Certain alerts in EMM are defined as “Themes”. The
statistics system handles these in a special way by
keeping cross-correlation statistics for counts of articles
which trigger the theme and a country alert. Country
alerts are defined using the multilingual names of
countries, their capital cities and where appropriate the
names of national leaders. In this way the alert systems
keep a running tally of the numbers of articles triggering
both a theme and a country. This proves to be very
effective at detecting hotspots in themes and places.
These results are displayed on world maps colouring the
countries with enhanced statistics. News maps therefore
display the relative media reporting for a given time
period for all countries of the world. In the case of EMM
they are driven by statistical correlation data recorded by
the EMM alert system. Such statistical data can be used
to derive normalised indicators which “measure” the
relative media coverage for a given topic and a given
country. This technique has been applied to detect socalled “forgotten crises” which are countries with
humanitarian needs arising from famine or conflict, but
under-reported in the world’s media. An analysis of such
forgotten crises forms one of the bases for planning the
yearly aid budget of the EU office for humanitarian aid.

4. Web Mining Tools: OSINT Suite
OSINT applications for Law Enforcement agencies
often involve monitoring specific web sites or mining the
Internet for people and/or topics. This requires a different
approach to that used for news monitoring. The search
engines already provide the most targeted and largest
coverage of indexed site content available on the
Internet. Therefore it makes sense to leverage off these
systems to provide better information extraction tools.
For this reason the key elements of EMM have been
combined into a standalone Java application for web
mining.
Case Management, Site monitoring, text
extraction and entity extraction tools are packaged in a
visual interface. A case consists of documents retrieved
through Google searches or from crawling specific sites
and a database of extracted linked entities. The
information retrieval components are an adaptation of the
scraper/grabber from EMM and the information
extraction component uses the named entity recognition
tools from News Explorer.
This is still a work in progress and one challenge is
to present the end user with an overview of the data
without reading all the text. Figure 7 shows one
approach to this allowing the user to interact with and
visualize the derived entity relationships found across all
the case documents.

Figure 6: Live event monitor showing location s
of extracted violent events

3.4. Geotagging
Geotagging of text depends on the accurate
identification of place names in texts. There are many
problems inherent in this process. Examples include
places like Split, Victoria, and some 8 variants of Paris
including Paris, Texas. Another problem is the different
spellings of names across languages. We use a system
that has been developed by Pouliquen et al. [10] which
recognizes exonyms (foreign language equivalents eg.
Venice, Venezia). Disambiguation relies on country
scores where a place name adds to an overall score as
does a mentioned region or the country name itself.
Geotagging clusters is more accurate than
geotagging individual articles since each cluster member
contributes to the overall location score for the story.
The place with most references becomes the story
location. Recently a KML interface for EMM clusters

324

Language-Independent Text Features as an Interlingua
for Cross-lingual Text Analysis Applications. In:
Information Society 2004 (IS'2004) - Proceedings B of
the 7th International Multiconference - Language
Technologies, pages 2-12. Ljubljana, Slovenia, 13-14
October 2004.
[6] Pouliquen Bruno, Ralf Steinberger, Camelia Ignat, Irina
Temnikova, Anna Widiger, Wajdi Zaghouani & Jan
Žižka (2005). Multilingual person name recognition and
transliteration. Journal CORELA - Cognition,
Représentation, Langage. Numéros spéciaux, Le
traitement lexicographique des noms propres. ISSN
1638-5748. (Available online at: http://edel.univpoitiers.fr/corela/document.php?id=490).
[7] Pouliquen Bruno, Ralf Steinberger & Clive Best (2007).
Automatic Detection of Quotations in Multilingual
News. In: Proceedings of the International Conference
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing
(RANLP'2007). Borovets, Bulgaria, 27-29.09.2007.
[8] Hristo Tanev (2007). Unsupervised Learning of Social
Networks from a Multiple-Source News Corpus.
Proceedings of the Workshop Multi-source Multilingual
Information
Extraction
and
Summarization
(MMIES'2007) held at RANLP'2007. Borovets,
Bulgaria, 26 September 2007
[9] Piskorski Jakub, Hristo Tanev & Pinar Oezden
Wennerberg (2007). Extracting ViolentEvents from Online News for Ontology Population. 10th International
Conference on Business Information Systems
(BIS'2007). Poznan, Poland, 25-27 April 2007. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, LNCS 4439, pages 287-300.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York.
[10] Pouliquen Bruno, Marco Kimler, Ralf Steinberger,
Camelia Ignat, Tamara Oellinger, Ken Blackler, Flavio
Fuart, Wajdi Zaghouani, Anna Widiger, Ann-Charlotte
Forslund, Clive Best (2006). Geocoding multilingual
texts: Recognition, Disambiguation and Visualisation.
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'2006), pp.
53-58. Genoa, Italy, 24-26 May 2006.
[11] Clive Best, Erik van der Goot, Ken Blackler, Teofilo
Garcia, David Horby, Ralf Steinberger and Bruno
Pouliquen (2005). Mapping World Events. In: Peter van
Oosterom, Siyka Zlatanova & Elfriede M. Fendel (eds.)
Geo-information for Disaster Management. pp. 683-696.
Springer. ISBN: 3-540-24988-5.

Figure 7: OSINT Suite Interface

5. Conclusions and Future Work
An automatic news analysis and recording system is
in operation and can be referenced on the Internet. Novel
features are the cross-lingual linkage of news, entities
and places. 300,000 persons have been derived from just
over 4 years of news analysis and automatic name
variants deduced. Linking this with the existing EMM
alert system has made possible automated country, topic
and person tracking.
Future work includes sentiment detection, with the
aim of tracking an entity’s reputation and developing risk
indicators based on violent event monitoring. Expanding
information extraction to new languages can also help to
compare how events are perceived in different countries.

Acknowledgements
Many of these results are due to the contributions
from my ex-colleagues at the EMM project, Joint
Research Centre, Ispra.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

C. Best, Open Source Intelligence, NATO Advanced
Study Institute, “Mining Massive Datasets for Security”,
Gazzada, September 2007, IOS Press
C. Best, E Van der Goot, K. Blackler, T Garcia, D.
Horby. Europe Media Monitor EUR 22173 EN,
European Commission December 2005
Really Simple Syndication 2.0 Specifications ,
http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/rss/rss.html
R. Steinberger, B. Pouliquen, C. Ignat, “Navigating
multilingual news collections using automatically
extracted information.” Vesna Lužar-Stiffler & Vesna
Hljuz Dobric (Eds.): Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference 'Information Technology
Interfaces' (ITI'2005), pp. 27-34. Cavtat / Dubrovnik,
Croatia, June 20-23, 2005.
Steinberger Ralf, Bruno Pouliquen & Camelia Ignat
(2004). Exploiting Multilingual Nomenclatures and

325

