Exploring Proportions: Comparative Visualization of Categorical Data
Harald Piringer∗

Matthias Buchetics†

VRVis Research Center, Vienna, Austria

VRVis Research Center, Vienna, Austria

Figure 1: Five dimensions of a social survey. Red and blue lines indicate over- and under-proportional relationships between categories of
adjacent axes by visualizing the measure Lift [1]. The visualization shows that people being proud of their nation’s army tend to be proud about
national scientific and technical achievements as well.

A BSTRACT
This poster describes an approach to facilitate comparisons in
multi-dimensional categorical data. The key idea is to represent
over- or under-proportional relationships explicitly. On an overview
level, the visualization of various measures conveys pair-wise relationships between categorical dimensions. For more details, interaction supports to relate a single category to all categories of multiple dimensions. We discuss methods for representing relationships
and visualization-driven strategies for ordering dimensions and categories, and we illustrate the approach by means of data from a
social survey.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces—Interaction Styles
1 I NTRODUCTION
The identification of relationships between categories of different
dimensions is an important and common task in statistics. Crosstabulations [4] are a traditional method for relating two categorical
dimensions. They typically provide the absolute and expected joint
probabilities as well as both conditional probabilities for any pair
of categories. Mosaic displays are a well-known method to graphically represent cross-tabulations [2]. They recursively subdivide
space and represent frequency values of categories by areas on the
screen. However, despite their usefulness and popularity, Mosaic
displays require a ranking of the dimensions and do not scale well
with respect to the number of displayed dimensions.
Parallel Sets [3] are an interactive approach to visualize crosstabulations by combining the layout of parallel coordinates with
a frequency-based visualization of the categories as scaled boxes.
The width of parallelograms represents the joint probabilities P(A ∩
B) for all pairs of categories A, B in adjacent axes. However, joint
∗ e-mail:

hp@vrvis.at

† e-mail:buchetics@vrvis.at

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

probabilities themselves provide no information about the proportionality of a relationship. In fact, over- or under-proportional relationships are not easy to perceive from the parallelograms of Parallel Sets.
The goal of our work is to facilitate comparisons in multidimensional categorical data by representing over- or underproportional relationships explicitly. Our approach supports this
comparison at two levels: First, the visualization of various measures conveys an overview over pair-wise relationships between
categorical dimensions. Second, interaction supports relating a single category to all categories of multiple dimensions. We illustrate
the approach by means of social survey data concerning national
consciousness and identity.
2

OVERVIEW

OF

P ROPORTIONAL R ELATIONSHIPS

The basic layout of our approach is motivated by Parallel Sets.
Each dimension is represented as an axis representing 100% of
the data which is subdivided with respect to the relative frequencies of the categories (see Fig. 1). Multiple dimensions are shown
as parallel axes. In contrast to Parallel Sets, however, the user
may choose between different statistical measures to be visualized
as connections between pairs of categories: Support (P(A ∩ B)),
Confidence (P(A ∩ B)/P(A), also denoted as P(B|A)), Lift [1]
(P(A ∩ B) / (P(A) ∗ P(B))), Difference (P(A ∩ B) − (P(A) ∗
P(B))), and Degree of Independence (DoI) (P(B|A) − P(B)). A
key distinction between these measures is the sensitivity to category sizes. For example, Lift may generate misleading results for
small categories, while Difference may only become large in case
of significant support.
For the non-symmetric measures Confidence and DoI, the category A is assumed to belong to the upper axis. The result for each
pair is mapped to the color and the width of an according connection line. For lift, difference and DoI, the hue indicates the “sign”
of the relationship. We apply red to over-proportional associations
(i.e., lift > 1, difference > 0, DoI > 0). Under-proportional relations are optional, as they often represent the reverse conclusion
and thus usually convey little new information (if visualized, they
are shown in blue). For support and confidence, there is no sign

295

Figure 2: Relating the category ”female” to four other dimensions. Orange bars show the percentages of entries per category and arrows indicate
the over- and under-proportional relationships. As one result, women left questions concerning pride unanswered more often than men.

expected frequency
actual frequency
Figure 3: Arrows visualize the difference between expected and actual frequencies.

and lines are drawn in shades of gray. The intensity of the respective color and the width of the line are derived from the distinctness
of the association. The result range necessary for this mapping is
inherent in all cases apart from positive values of lift, where results greater than 4 are clamped to 4 as a heuristic (results of 4
already indicate very strong associations and only occur for small
categories). In order to reduce clutter and to focus on significant relationships, the user may hide results below a certain user-defined
threshold. Altering this threshold is an effective way for trading off
the amount of displayed information with visual complexity.
Both the order of the axes as well as the order of the categories
within one axis are important for an effective visualization. Apart
from interactive reordering by drag and drop, various automatic
strategies may emphasize different aspects. Concerning the order
of axes, one strategy is to put strongly related dimensions next to
each other. To do so, we determine the absolute maximal and the
absolute average result of the current measure for all pairs of dimensions. These values can be used to select dimensions iteratively for
ranking them from top to bottom. An interesting option is to specify
the first dimension as a given starting point.
Concerning the order of categories, a visualization-driven strategy is to minimize the length of strong connection lines. More precisely, the user may reorder the categories of one axis at a time
with respect to one neighboring axis. As finding an optimal solution becomes too computationally expensive for a growing number
of categories, we apply a heuristic algorithm. However, a detailed
description of this algorithm is beyond the scope of this poster.
3

I NTERACTIVE C OMPARISON

OF

C ATEGORIES

In addition to comparing adjacent axes as descibed above, our approach also supports to relate single categories to all dimensions
simultaneously (see Fig. 2). Moving the cursor above any category
C displays an orange bar in all other categories. For each category
X, the length of this bar corresponds to the percentage of entries of
C, i.e., the joint probability P(C ∩X). Drawing such bars is standard

296

but does not provide information about proportional relationships.
Therefore, each category X also visualizes the difference to the
expected joint probability P(C ∗ X) as an arrow (see Fig. 3). The
direction of the arrow indicates the sign of the proportionality (left
means under-proportional, right means over-proportional), and the
size corresponds to the distinctness. Due to its simplicity, this technique has turned out to be both intuitive and efficient. Moving the
cursor along an axis supports exploring relationships consecutively
for all categories within a short time.
4 D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We collected first feedback from a sociologist, who frequently analyzes survey data. He considers the fast visual identification of overand under-proportional relationships in the context of absolute frequencies of categories as a key advantage of our approach. In joint
analysis sessions, the visualization provided useful overviews for
up to 10 dimensions. The sociologist also considered the arrows
intuitive and potentially suitable to improve the identification of
relationships in different frequency-based visualizations (e.g., bar
charts and pie charts).
As the most important disadvantage, the layout somewhat limits the number of categories per dimension to 10 – 30 (depending
on the screen resolution and the distribution of frequencies). Very
small categories may also become hard to read. We intend to address these issues in future work by providing means for grouping
or filtering categories as well as by adding lenses. Another aspect of
future work concerns a more thorough evaluation in different application domains. Finally, while connection lines are now only drawn
between adjacent dimensions, an interesting aspect for future work
would be to split connection lines by an additional ”active” dimension in a similar way as Parallel Sets.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Brin, R. Motwani, J. D. Ullman, and S. Tsur. Dynamic itemset
counting and implication rules for market basket data. In SIGMOD
’97: Proceedings of the 1997 ACM SIGMOD international conference
on Management of data, pages 255–264, New York, NY, USA, 1997.
ACM Press.
[2] M. Friendly. Visualizing categorical data: Data, stories and pictures.
In SAS User Group International Conf. Proceedings, pages 190–200,
2000.
[3] R. Kosara, F. Bendix, and H. Hauser. Parallel sets: Interactive exploration and visual analysis of categorical data. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG), 12(4):558–568, 2006.
[4] StatSoft Inc.
Electronic Statistics Textbook.
http://www.
statsoft.com/textbook/stathome.html, 2007.

