Query-Based Coordinated Multiple Views with Feature Similarity Space
for Visual Analysis of MRI Repositories
Ian Bowman∗

Shantanu H. Joshi†

John Darrell Van Horn‡

Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90034

A BSTRACT
It is a laborious process to quantify relationship patterns within
a feature-rich archive. For example, understanding the degree of
neuroanatomical similarity between the scanned subjects of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) repository is a nontrivial task. In
this work we present a Coordinated Multiple View (CMV) system
for visually analyzing collections of feature-rich datasets. A querybased user interface operates on a feature-respective data scheme,
and is geared towards domain experts that are non-specialists in
informatics and analytics. We employ multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) to project feature surface representations into threedimensions, where proximity in location is proportional to the feature similarity. Through query feedback and environment navigation, the user groups clusters that exhibit probable trends across
feature and attribute. The system provides supervised classification
methods for determining attribute classes within the user selected
groups. Finally, using visual or analytical feature-wise exploration
the user determines intra-group feature commonality.
Keywords: Coordinated multiple views, query-based visualization,
data mining.
Index Terms: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human factors; H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces
1

I NTRODUCTION

One challenge among many for those analyzing the data of featurerich archives is to overview similarities between datasets. A further
challenge is identifying trends across features and attributes. (We
differentiate between structure describing feature values such as
curvature and intensity, and categorical attribute values like age and
handedness.) Image analysts for example, seek to determine how
photo tags trend with pixel patterns, while neuroscientists search
for relationships present between subject data and neuroanatomy
within MRI images. In the case of MRI imaging studies, the data
is gathered for a well-defined clinical study protocol. The principle investigator uses the data to answer specific questions asked
before the data was collected, and after which the data is typically
archived. Post-archival and storage however, there are several interesting questions that may arise that can only be addressed via
retrospective data mining.
The problem we address in this work is how to provide users the
tools to interactively mine and extract maximum knowledge from
these types of feature-rich collections. We seek to enable users
the capability to generate hypotheses through a dynamic and user∗ e-mail:ibowman@loni.ucla.edu
† e-mail:

sjoshi@loni.ucla.edu

‡ e-mail:jvanhorn@loni.ucla.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

friendly framework that investigates the data in ways not conceived
by those who collected it.
By definition, feature data contain structured information appropriate for graphical user-interaction. Analytical methods that
treat data uniformly disregard the opportunity for user-driven visual processing. Here we present a query-based CMV system for
discovering feature-attribute relationships within an archive. A
three-dimensional graphical overview of the data archive provides
the foundation of our interactive environment. Each individual
dataset is positioned within three-dimensional space describing feature similarity. We define this interactive environment as Feature
Similarity Space (see section 2). Through query-result interaction,
the user defines groups of data to isolate feature dependent placements. Supervised classification discovers group distribution dependent on attributes. If exact group similarity is unclear, visual inspection of feature representative surface coloration within the FSS
and feature-wise analysis of the assigned groups identify feature
trends. Typical interface interaction is depicted by Figure 1.
2 M ETHODS
The system workflow consists of the following stages:
1. The input is an archive of feature-rich imaging data. We preprocess each dataset to extract global and regional feature values.
2. Using pairwise distance and MDS, we position the representative surfaces in an interactive three dimensional space to represent feature similarity between datasets. We define this interactive three dimensional space as Feature Similarity Space
(FSS). This environment is fully navigable, allowing zooming and rotation of member datasets. To preserve framerates
we employ a multi-resolution approach that varies polygon
counts of rendered surfaces by a factor of 10, based on zoom
level (Fig. 1(a)). In addition to FSS positioning, feature values specify the mapped colors on each surface.
3. We provide query-based tools for exploring attribute distributions within FSS. Revisable query results highlight trends
between feature and attribute space, and the user creates and
names strongly trending dataset groups (Fig. 1(b)).
4. Grouping information facilitates our supervised classification
framework. After analytical investigation, the user classifies
each of the feature-similar groups by attribute values present
(Fig. 1(c)).
5. In some cases due to the loss of information inherent to MDS,
specific per group feature trends are not clear within FSS. Visual inspection of feature value color mapped surfaces, as well
as feature analysis using a series of plots allows identification
of intra-group feature similarity.
As specific MDS based projection varies widely on input parameters, MDS is driven by user-selected features and regions of interest. Once these parameters are specified and dataset positioning has
been determined within FSS, the user begins exploring the data to
gain a general overview of the collection’s structure.

267

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) Within Feature Similarity Space, MRI surface data is viewable at multiple zoom levels. The right half image demonstrates the
zoom-determined multi-resolution approach employed to maintain interactive frame rates. (b) Interactive grouping allows the user to label and
color data members by feature similarity or subject metadata values. (c) Exploratory clustering and classification quantifies the feature and
attribute distributions of the user-selected groups.

This assignment as shown in Figure 2.
We then apply supervised classification on the user assigned
group information to derive attribute-valued classes. The figure displays a linked parallel and scatter plot, data values painted by user
assigned group color. This view reveals that age does indeed classify the two distinct groups. Further analysis of the parallel coordinate plot shows that hippocampal volume is inversely proportional
to age among the groups.

Figure 2: Grouping and classification of AIBL and CNP based on
hippocampal value feature-similar clusters. Two distinct clusters are
visible in the FSS. The linked plots demonstrate that there is a correlation between hippocampal volume and age. The top cluster is
made up almost exclusively of older subjects. (Image background is
portion of a skybox used to aid navigation and rotation.)

3

R ESULTS

We applied our method to an archive of T1-anatomical MRI image
volumes, collected from diverse clinical neuroimaging studies. Our
data was comprised of a sample of N=354 subjects from the AIBL
(236 subjects), and the CNP (118 subjects) datasets. The AIBL
dataset consists of patients with Alzheimer’s, mild cognitively impaired disorders and normal controls. The image processing, segmentation, and extraction utilities were exported through the LONI
Pipeline [1].
The predominant effect of Alzheimer’s is the atrophy of hippocampal volume. Thus, when investigating the AIBL and CNP
study data we are primarily interested in identifying how hippocampal volume varies dependent on subject meta-data attribute values.
Therefore, the system employs a functional Jensen-Shannon divergence technique [2] using hippocampal volume as input to populate
the pairwise distance matrix. Using MDS we position the data in
FSS as described in section 2.
After query-based highlighting hints at age dependent placement
in FSS, we are compelled to investigate a relationship between hippocampal volume and age. We use feature-wise selection to create
exclusive feature-similar groups out of the top and bottom clusters.

268

4 D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this paper we describe a query-based CMV system for discovering relationships between feature and attribute values. Our system
builds upon a pairwise distance calculation of dataset features to
create a compelling visualization that takes advantage of user image
processing capability. By offloading feature extraction and surface
generation to pre-processing, the system provides an exploratory
visual overview of the data at interactive rates. The FSS environment anchors query-based grouping of clusters, and exploration of
intra-group feature values.
We will continue to investigate the most effective systems for the
multidimensional scaling and projection. Future evaluations will
include what features and distance metrics lend themselves to effective reduction. We will also attempt to identify the coordinate
systems that lead to the most intuitive comprehension of feature
similarity within the data.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported in part by NIH grants RC1MH088194 and
P41 RR013642.
R EFERENCES
[1] I. Dinov, K. Lozev, P. Petrosyan, Z. Liu, P. Eggert, J. Pierce, A. Zamanyan, S. Chakrapani, J. Van Horn, D. S. Parker, R. Magsipoc, K. Leung, B. Gutman, R. Woods, and A. Toga. Neuroimaging study designs,
computational analyses and data provenance using the loni pipeline.
PLoS ONE, 5(9):e13070, 09 2010.
[2] S. H. Joshi, I. Bowman, A. W. Toga, and J. D. Van Horn. Brain pattern
analysis of cortical valued distributions. In IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, page Accepted for Publication. IEEE,
2011.

