Exploring Agent-Based Simulations using Temporal Graphs
R. Jordan Crouser∗

Jeremy G. Freeman †

Remco Chang‡

Tufts University

Tufts University

Tufts University

A BSTRACT

2

Agent-based simulation has become a key technique for modeling
and simulating dynamic, complicated behaviors in social and behavioral sciences. Lacking the appropriate tools and support, it is
difficult for social scientists to thoroughly analyze the results of
these simulations. In this work, we capture the complex relationships between discrete simulation states by visualizing the data as
a temporal graph. In collaboration with expert analysts, we identify two graph structures which capture important relationships between pivotal states in the simulation and their inevitable outcomes.
Finally, we demonstrate the utility of these structures in the interactive analysis of a large-scale social science simulation of political
power in present-day Thailand.

Visualization of graph structures is a well-studied area in computational science. For a survey, see work by Herman et al. [3]. However, the study of graphs in visual analytics has primarily been restricted to the study of entity relationships. There has been much
interest in tools for visualizing these relationships in the context of
social networks [2], protein interaction [4], and more. There is also
some existing work in visualizing general dynamic graphs [1, 7]
as well as recent interest in visualizing entity-relationship graphs
with a temporal component in the area of information propagation
through a network [5]. While these graphs encode a temporal component of the data they represent, to our knowledge there exists no
research on the utilization of graph structures for the analysis of
aggregated temporal simulation data.

1

3

I NTRODUCTION

Modeling dynamic, complex behaviors is a key component of research in political science. In recent years, agent-based simulation
has become a vital technique for modeling and exploring these behaviors in a country’s political patterns, which might indicate the
imminence of civil unrest and help predict catastrophic events [6].
A complete exploration of the resulting simulation data could help
social and political scientists understand nuanced social behaviors,
find patterns of violence and socioeconomic repression, predict
catastrophic events and better inform the decision-makers who influence global policy. Unfortunately, existing methods and tools
only permit either a broad-overview analysis of the entire dataset,
or an in-depth analysis of a single simulation run. Without the ability to interactively compare simulation runs and understand how
they relate, it is extremely difficult to effectively interpret and analyze the results of these simulations.
We begin to address these needs by developing a theoretical
framework and visualization techniques for analyzing complex dynamic behaviors using temporal graphs. In this graph, a vertex
represents a unique configuration of the variables in the simulation, and a directed edge indicates a temporal transition between
two states. We aggregate a large set of sample sequences from the
agent-based simulation to build the graph. Each of these sequences
can be thought of as a pathway through the “simulation space”, the
set of reachable configurations in the high-dimensional parameter
space. Substructures in the graph can be mapped to semantically
meaningful relationships between simulation states, and we can develop efficient algorithms to support interactive analytical reasoning. In collaboration with expert analysts in political science, we
identify several important relationships between states in the simulation. By supporting interactive exploration of these underlying
structures, we can assist domain experts in uncovering important
yet subtle patterns in their simulations.
∗ e-mail:

rcrous01@cs.tufts.edu
jeremy.freeman@cs.tufts.edu
‡ e-mail: remco@cs.tufts.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

G RAPHS

IN

V ISUAL A NALYTICS

M ETHODS

To evaluate this framework and validate our claim that temporal
graphs are useful in an interactive visual analysis environment for
political scientists, we implemented a functional interactive prototype within Cytoscape [8], an existing graph visualization system.
We then built a temporal graph of the results of a real-world political science simulation of political violence and power systems
in present-day Thailand. This simulation models the interaction of
31 political identities, tracking their popularity, level of violence,
protest, power and influence. The resulting graph contains 14,887
unique vertices and 59,000 edges. The graph formulation was then
presented to a panel of 4 analysts for discussion and preliminary
evaluation.
4

E VALUATION : F INDING M EANING

THROUGH

S TRUCTURE

In the following sections, we describe several state relationships
that are of interest to our collaborators in political science. While
a formal proof is beyond the scope of this paper, our research has
shown that each of these relationships can be efficiently computed
on a standard desktop machine. All empirical results were obtained
using an Intel Core 2 Quad 2.66Ghz desktop with 2GB of RAM
running Windows XP.
4.1

Disaster Avoidance

One important task facing the analysts we interviewed is maintaining an awareness of threat scenarios and developing strategies for
efficient, cost-effective disaster avoidance. Using filtering tools, the
analysts can identify clusters that exhibit high levels of violence or
states where a known oppressive regime is in power. Once these
states have been located, it is of great interest to them to be able
to detect vertices that inevitably lead into these situations, and to
identify critical decision points preceding these paths (see Fig. 1).
These states may appear non-threatening on the surface, leading
traditional analysis to overlook them. However, they may represent a favorable balance of conditions for the rise to power of the
oppressive organization or violent regime. By exploring the configurations on the periphery of the set, the analysts are able to make
recommendations regarding early warning signs to watch for in the
real world and to identify critical decision points that could help
avert disaster.
To this end, we developed an iterative set-building algorithm to
identify these state with a theoretical bound of O(n2 ) time and a

271

heuristic admits no improvement over the na¨ıve algorithm in the
worst case, with an upper bound of O(n3 ). However, in practice the
algorithm as implemented improved performance by three orders
of magnitude, reducing the average running time on the trial graph
from ∼ 1100ms to ∼ 1ms.

Figure 1: Every maximal path leaving a yellow vertex eventually
passes through A. If we are trying to avoid reaching A, vertices F
and G are critical decision points.

remarkably fast in-practice running time. To demonstrate the applicability of this algorithm for use in real-time analysis, we systematically ran our implementation on each of the vertices in the graph
and tracked its running time. In all instances, the algorithm terminated in under 1ms. This result provides strong evidence for the
applicability of this algorithm to interactive data exploration using
temporal graphs.
4.2 Forecasting Outcomes
Another important area of concern for our analysts is preparation
for upcoming events. Using a graph built from their simulation data,
it is helpful for them to be able to locate a state in the system that
closely resembles current conditions and to then detect unavoidable
future states. That is, given a starting vertex representing a configuration of the simulation, determine the set of inevitable outcomes.
We can also define this relationship as the set of vertices that are
visited along every maximal path leading out of the starting vertex
(see Fig. 2).

5 D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
As we have demonstrated in this paper, modeling agent-based simulation data as a temporal graph provides a compact and semantically meaningful structure, presenting the analyst a more complete
and intuitive view of the simulation space and admitting efficient
algorithms for real-time analysis of data patterns. The algorithms
presented in this work represent only a small fraction of the efficient data exploration mechanisms afforded by this model. In our
future work, we plan to leverage these affordances within a robust
visual analytics system, providing analysts with access to subtler,
more nuanced patterns in their data.
6 C ONCLUSION
In the above sections, we have made an argument for the utility of
temporal graphs in the analysis of agent-based simulation data in
political science, and have identified graph structures with strong
semantic significance. It is our strong belief that this representation as well as the substructures and algorithms presented in this
work are much more broadly applicable. In particular, we propose
that this same formulation can be applied to other problems involving similarly large parameter spaces that can be explored in pieces.
Interactive exploration of temporal graph representations can help
analysts find relationships between simulation states as well as simulation runs, providing support for the development of a deeper understanding of the simulation and yielding more robust evidence for
use in decision-making and policy development.
R EFERENCES

Figure 2: Every path leaving G passes eventually through each of the
yellow vertices.

To compute this set in real time, we developed a hybrid algorithm
that leverages this secondary definition as well as sequential application the previous set-building algorithm. Because any vertex in
this set must appear in every maximal path out of the starting vertex,
we perform a preliminary set reduction by first selecting a random
maximal path. We can then use the previous iterative set-building
algorithm on the vertices in this path rather than the entire reachable
subgraph, and may therefore eliminate a large portion of the computation. Our empirical results indicate that, in practice, randomly
chosen maximal paths are overwhelmingly short, due perhaps to
the small-world phenomena 1 exhibited in many real-world graphs.
To demonstrate the suitability of this algorithm for use in real-time
analysis, we systematically ran our implementation on each of the
vertices in the graph and tracked its running time. As a control, we
also tracked the running time of the na¨ıve application of the iterative set-building algorithm to each vertex in the reachable subgraph,
without first computing a maximal path. Note this set reduction
1 In a small-world network, the average distance between two randomly
chosen vertices grows proportionally to the logarithm of the number of vertices in the network.

272

[1] S. Bender-deMoll and D. McFarland. The art and science of dynamic
network visualization. Journal of Social Structure, 7(2), 2006.
[2] J. Heer and D. Boyd. Vizster: Visualizing online social networks. 2005.
[3] I. Herman, G. Melanc¸on, and M. Marshall. Graph visualization and
navigation in information visualization: A survey. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 6(1):24–43, 2000.
[4] F. Iragne, M. Nikolski, B. Mathieu, D. Auber, and D. Sherman.
ProViz: protein interaction visualization and exploration. Bioinformatics, 21(2):272, 2005.
[5] D. Liben-Nowell and J. Kleinberg. Tracing information flow on a
global scale using Internet chain-letter data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(12):4633, 2008.
[6] I. Lustick, B. Alcorn, M. Garces, and A. Ruvinsky. From Theory to
Simulation: The Dynamic Political Hierarchy in Country Virtualization Models. In American Political Science Association (APSA) 2010
Annual Meeting, 2010.
[7] J. Moody, D. McFarland, and S. Bender-deMoll. Dynamic network
visualization1. ajs, 110(4):1206–41, 2005.
[8] P. Shannon, A. Markiel, O. Ozier, N. Baliga, J. Wang, D. Ramage,
N. Amin, B. Schwikowski, and T. Ideker. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks.
Genome research, 13(11):2498, 2003.

