A State Transition Approach to Understanding Users’ Interactions
Dong Hyun Jeong∗

Soo-Yeon Ji†

William Ribarsky‡

Remco Chang§

University of the District of Columbia

Bowie State University

University of North Carolina at Charlotte

Tufts University

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Overview of InteractionViz. It consists of two windows as a Relation Window (a) and a Transition Window (b). The Relation Window
consists of multiple coordinated views to show the relationships among keywords, accounts, and transactions. Experts’ findings on transactions
are represented in the Relation Window and their overall semantic-level interactions (i.e. keywords, accounts, and transactions) are displayed in
the Transition Window by following a state transition approach.

A BSTRACT
Understanding users’ interactions is considered as one of the important research topics in visual analytics. Although numerous empirical user studies have been performed to understand a user’s interaction, a limited study has been successful in connecting the user’s
interaction to his/her reasoning. In this paper, we present an approach of understanding experts’ interactive analysis by connecting
their interactions to conclusions (i.e. findings) through a state transition approach.
1

I NTRODUCTION

Although many useful visualization applications have been designed, how much the designed systems are useful in solving analytical questions is regarded as a research challenge. In the visualization community, researchers discussed to find possible research directions in understanding users’ interactions by connecting
to their reasonings [1]. From the discussion, one of the promising
research directions was to use an eye-tracking device, with which
an user’s interaction can be analyzed by tracking one’s visually processed visual elements. Although this is a quite promising approach
in understanding users’ interactions, how to connect the user’s interaction to her reasoning and how to analyze the captured eyetracking data is still unknown. In contrary to this approach, we
performed an expert evaluation to see how user interactions encode
∗ e-mail:

djeong@udc.edu

† e-mail:sji@bowiestate.edu
‡ e-mail:ribarsky@uncc.edu
§ e-mail:rchang@tufts.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

experts’ reasoning [3]. From the study, we found that by examining
financial analysts’ interactions (semantic-level interactions), about
up to 79% of their findings can be recovered through the use of a
visual analytical tool. This indicates that the user’s interaction logs
(e.g. semantic-level interactions such as keywords, accounts, and
transactions) are somewhat connected to one’s reasoning behind the
analysis process. In addition, we observed that financial analysts
have different opinions on each financial transaction as suspicious,
unsuspicious, and inconclusive. Although they have different ideas
and sometimes contradict each other on determining each transaction, we found that finding the evidence how they ended up with
their conclusions is difficult.
In this paper, we propose an approach to understand the analysts’
interactions. To extract their interactions and discover the reasoning
behind the analysis processes, we used a state transition approach
by creating a state transition matrix (i.e. Markov Chain [5]). In
here, each user-created interaction is regarded as a state. Depending
on the number of semantic information, a m × m transition matrix
is generated by referencing the overall user’s interactions. With this
transition matrix, the user’s reasoning can be recovered. This paper
begins with describing the designed visual analytics system, then
moves to explaining how the user’s interactions can be analyzed by
connecting them to her reasoning through the system.
2

S YSTEM D ESIGN

In our previous study [3, 4], we performed an experts’ user study
based on a well-known financial visual analytics system (called
WireVis [2]). From the study, we observed that financial analysts
have different opinions on each financial transaction as suspicious,
unsuspicious, and inconclusive. Since their decisions are often
based on experiences, it is difficult to understand how they concluded with their decisions. To understand how they ended up with
different conclusions, we designed a system (called InteractionViz)

285

by following a coordinated multiple views approach. As shown
in Figure 1, InteractionViz consists of two windows as a Relation
Window and a Transition Window. The Relation Window represents the relationship among accounts, keywords, and transactions.
And the Transition Window shows how the user transits from one
state to another while performing a visual exploration on financial
data.
(a)

2.1

The Relation Window is designed consisting of three views: a Projection View (Figure 1(a) (A)), an Information View (Figure 1(a) (B
∼ D)), and a Data View (Figure 1(a) (E)). All views are coordinated
in such a way that any interaction with one view is immediately reflected in all the other views (brushing & linking).
The Projection View projects all transaction data points onto a
two-dimensional coordinate system based on Principle Component
Analysis (PCA). The Information View has three information panels as accounts ((Figure 1(a) (B))), keywords (Figure 1(a) (C)), and
the amounts of the transactions (Figure 1(a) (D)). Relevant information of highlighted or selected transactions are visualized in these
panels as connected lines. The Data View shows a parallel coordinates visualization of all transactions in the original data dimensions. There are about 8 dimensions in the financial transaction data
as sender account, receiver account, the amounts of the transactions,
date information (year, month, and day), number of keywords, and
actual keywords related to each transaction.
2.2

Transition Window

The Transition Window represents the user’s semantic interactions
as a state transition matrix. As we mentioned above, each interaction is regarded as a state that indicates the user’s interaction with
visual element(s). The changes of state indicate transitions with
the probabilities associated with various state-changes. The set of
all states and transition probabilities in the state transition matrix
completely characterizes a Markov chain. Since the financial transaction data, which we used in our system, include 380 accounts
(including account clusters), 29 keywords, 249 transactions, and
11020 account × keyword combinations, roughly a 11680 × 11680
transition matrix is created. Since all states cannot be visited by the
user, non-visited states are removed from the transition matrix to
increase the readability of represented visual elements. In the transition matrix, y-axis indicates current states and x-axis represents
future transition states.
How much time the user stayed at each state by looking at transaction information is measured in seconds and mapped with a gradient blue color. Darker blue indicates the user spent more time
proportionally to other states. Additionally, the user’s interactions
are represented as a connected spline curve (see Figure 1(b)).
3

C ONNECTING

THE

U SERS ’ F INDINGS

TO I NTERACTIONS

By investigating wire transactions, financial analysts often determine the investigated transaction(s) as suspicious, unsuspicious, or
inconclusive. To show how they ended up with their decisions, the
Relation Window and the Transition Window are closely connected
each other to show the user’s decisions (i.e. findings) and the user’s
interactions (i.e. reasoning), respectively.
In InteractionViz, all expert analysts’ decisions (i.e. findings)
and their interaction logs (i.e. semantic-level interactions) from the
previous study [3] are embedded. As shown in Figure 2, the analysts’ diverse opinions on each transaction are displayed inside the
Projection View and colored as red (“suspicious”), blue (“unsuspicious”), and green (“inconclusive”).
The user can move the mouse over the data in the information
panels and the projected data elements in the Relation Window in
order to allow her to focus on specific transactions and observe what
specific accounts are transacting over what keywords and amounts.

286

(b)

Relation Window
Figure 2: During the experts evaluation, financial analysts were requested to write down their final findings in transaction discovery
sheet. Figure (a) shows an expert’s transactions discovery sheet.
Experts’ findings in the transactions discovery sheets are mapped
to a grid cell in the Projection View (b). Since the two windows are
closely connected, any interaction in the Projection View will be reflected to a state transition matrix in the Transition Window.

After finding an interesting analysts’ decision in the Relation Window, the user can further investigate the corresponding analyst’s
interactions (i.e. semantic-interactions) in the Transition Window.
In the transition matrix, the user’s interactions are regarded as a set
of states, S = s1 , s2 , ..., sn . Since the user’s interactions start in one
of these states and move from one state to another, an interaction
is represented as a state with the probabilities pi j (called transition probabilities). With this approach, expert analysts’ interactive
analysis patterns can be recovered by connecting to their findings.
4 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose an approach of understanding financial
analysts’ interactions through a visual analytics application. By exploring and examining both wire transactions and the users’ interactions, it is possible to find how each expert ended up with decisions
on transactions as suspicious, unsuspicious, and inconclusive. The
provided set of interaction and representation techniques are useful to perform interactive exploration as well as examination on the
user’s interactions. Since experts’ decisions are diverse and sometimes contradictory to each other, tracing their reasoning can be an
important process to understand their analytical procedures on wire
transactions.
We believe that the system is well designed to understand the
analysts’ overall analytical processes. However, it is necessary to
conduct an evaluation to validate the system as well as our idea
of connecting the user’s findings to interactions in visualization.
Specifically, we are going to focus on recovering the analysts’ reasoning by observing the transition matrix.
R EFERENCES
[1] BELIV ’10: Proceedings of the 2010 AVI workshop on BEyond time
and errors: novel evaLuation methods for Information Visualization,
2010. Conference Chairs-Enrico Bertini, Heidi Lam, and Chair-Adam
Perer.
[2] R. Chang, M. Ghoniem, R. Kosara, W. Ribarsky, J. Yang, E. Suma,
C. Ziemkiewicz, D. Kern, and A. Sudjianto. Wirevis: Visualization
of categorical, time-varying data from financial transactions. In Visual
Analytics Science and Technology, 2007. VAST ’07. IEEE Symposium
on, pages 155–162, 2007.
[3] W. Dou, D. H. Jeong, F. Stukes, W. Ribarsky, H. R. Lipford, and
R. Chang. Recovering reasoning processes from user interactions.
IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 29:52–61, May 2009.
[4] D. H. Jeong, W. Dou, H. Lipford, F. Stukes, R. Chang, and W. Ribarsky.
Evaluating the relationship between user interaction and financial visual
analysis. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2008. VAST ’08.
IEEE Symposium on, pages 83 –90, 2008.
[5] S. Meyn and R. Tweedie. Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability.
Springer, first edition, 1996.

