Visualizing an Information Assurance Risk Taxonomy
Victoria Lemieux (University of British Columbia), Barbara Endicott-Popovsky (University of Washington), Karl Eckler
(University of Washington), Thomas Dang (University of British Columbia), Adam Jansen (University of British Columbia)

Fig. 1. Starlight Mapping. An added glow indicates cluster density.
Abstract—The researchers explore the intersections between Information Assurance and Risk using visual analysis of text mining
operations. The methodological approach involves searching for and extracting for analysis those abstracts and keywords
groupings that relate to risk within a defined subset of scientific research journals. This analysis is conducted through a triangulated
study incorporating visualizations produced using both Starlight and In-Spire visual analysis software. The results are definitional,
showing current attitudes within the Information Assurance research community towards risk management strategies, while
simultaneously demonstrating the value of visual analysis processes when engaging in sense making of a large body of knowledge.
Index Terms— I.7.m [Document and Text Processing]: Miscellaneous. K.6.5 [Security and Protection]: Theory.
Keywords— Risk, Risk Management, Information Assurance, Information Security, Visual Analysis.

1

I N TR O DU C TIO N

Information Assurance (IA) constitutes a very new field of academic
and practical endeavour that is concerned with threats to the
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability (CIA) of information
systems The domain has achieved recognition relatively recently
when the U.S. National Security Agency/Central Security Service
(NSA/CSS) published an official definition [1] some 15 years ago.
Since then, practitioners and researchers within IA have been
struggling with increasing threats to their systems, but also with their
work’s essential responsibilities: What exactly does IA cover?
In this particular study, our research team set out to look for
answers to this question by exploring the particular areas of risk most
commonly of concern to the IA community.
Our research team turned to visual analysis (VA) tools for our
investigations because of their usefulness in harnessing human visual
cognition to rapidly see patterns in large datasets and in facilitating
researchers’ interactive exploration of data to gain new insights.
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
2
M ETH
October
23 - OD
28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

Our methodological approach acknowledged that IA does not exist
as a defined field of research. Very few database products indexing

IA related materials feature “Information Assurance” as a keyword
on which to search, and even fewer peer-reviewed journals exist that
concentrate on IA to the exclusion of other topics. Therefore we
began by identifying peer-reviewed journals in which IA
professionals prefer to publish.
2.1
2.1 Journal Identification
The research team isolated 10 journals that are representative of
scholarly and professional IA publication. The NSA’s National
Centres of Academic Excellence formed the backbone of our
selection criteria. Maintaining an independent list of research and
teaching institutes from which to recruit IA professionals constitutes
a major aim of the agency, which coincided with our needs for this
project. Randomly selecting one of these scholars for each of the 30
schools listed in the CAE-R (the highest level of the NSA
certification scheme) formed the basis for a publication review.
The entire publication history for these 30 researchers produced a
database of 770 citations. Inspection of total publication counts
revealed a “top ten” list of journals in which the IA community has
published. The 10th position being a five-way tie, bibliometric ratings

287

(impact factor and eigenfactor) were used as a selection basis for the
final journal.
2.2
Dataset Retrieval
Once our ten target journals were isolated, researchers extracted the
full metadata for all refereed articles appearing in these journals after
1996 (the year IA was defined formally) and mentioning “risk” using
the following method: A search performed within the IEEE eXplore
database (for publications indexed there) for the publication title and
“risk” in the full text of the article. The results of this search were
extracted as full records to the RefWorks online bibliographic tool.
For journals that are not indexed within the IEEE database,
researchers searched on publication title and “risk” as a keyword in
the ISI database, exporting the results to RefWorks.
Once in RefWorks, we eliminated duplicate records as well as
records that contained no abstracts. After ensuring that reviews,
editorials and other non-research materials were excluded, a dataset
of 930 bibliographic records remained.
From RefWorks, the dataset was exported into CSV format and
transformed into a file using the .xml namespace required by InSpire and Starlight. After this process, researchers noted a need for
“plural removal” where the plural and singular forms of a term are
normalized. Plural removal in this case was accomplished manually,
searching and replacing terms in the .xml file.
2.3
Visual Analysis Tools
We created thematic clustering and interactive visualizations of text
using two programs: In-Spire and Starlight. Since both of these
programs use proprietary algorithms to cluster unstructured text, the
use of both tools provides a measure of rigour, via triangulation, to
the automatic clustering methodology.
The experiment also employed a peer analytic process, where an
expert in the use of the visual analysis tools works with domain
experts in information science and IA in order to refine and analyse
the semantic significance and coherence of the visualizations. The
approach allows domain experts the freedom to explore visually
without the encumbrance of having to learn how to ‘drive’ the text
mining and visualization algorithms. This approach also encourages
the VA expert to suggest directions in methodology freely to
maximize the potential of the visualization tools without prior
expertise in the semantics of the data.
2.4
Visual Clustering and Refinement
The VA expert worked with the domain expert to systematically
refine the clusters through adjustment of input parameters within
Starlight and In-Spire.
The two most important input parameters for both In-Spire and
Starlight are the dataset’s input fields to be considered for clustering,
and the list of words to ignore (“stopwords”, “outlier words”) during
the clustering process. We focused on two major input fields:
abstracts and keywords, producing clustered visualizations for both.
We chose to cluster keywords in addition to the article abstracts
because of the perceived richness of the keyword metadata, most
records containing several dozen human and machine assigned
keywords. We iterated the following process to refine the clusters:
First, examine the current clusters: Are there major themes within
the cluster (appearing in the first four labelled words) that are
unrelated to the research question? Irrelevant grammatical structures
may be creating meaningless clusters. Examples include adjectives
and adverbs (research themes are nouns by definition) and common
phraseology, such as “in this paper we” and “all rights reserved.”
Overly general topics (such as “Information” and “Risk”) create
clusters that are generic to the point of irrelevancy. Overly specific
topics (such as organizational names and software) contain meaning,
but are not helpful in defining a field’s position to risk, and thus were
excised. In all these cases, stop-words were added to the running list
and the clustering and Visual Analysis recalculated.

288

We repeated this process until the domain experts were satisfied
with the structure gleaned visually from the clusters, or when so
many keywords had been ignored that the text analysis engine
reached its limit: When adding stop-words produced a clustering
scheme that was not as coherent, or only equally coherent, as the last.
While other researchers note [2] that In-Spire may be less reliable
when individual records are exceedingly brief, excellent reasons
exist for only using keywords and abstracts in our analysis. Full-text
articles may contain keywords, phrases, and prose structure that are
too similar, causing unpredictable impacts on the clustering process.
In-Spire and Starlight were originally designed to work with news
articles or emails, documents a few pages in length and mostly
unstructured, instead of long, structurally similar research articles. In
a more free-formed analysis activity, such as sense making, the
analyst can continue to refine the cluster indefinitely to find
interesting insights; however, as this study aims to create a concrete
taxonomy, we stopped the process when the quality of the clustering
as a whole reached a plateau.
3

P RE LIM IN AR Y

FIN D IN GS .

Work on developing the IA risk taxonomy is ongoing, but a picture
emerges of a field concerned primarily with risks to the integrity and
availability of computational resources. The research is tightly
coupled with threats to network performance and network reliability
issues. Some additional discussion of code quality assurance surfaces
as well, though there is very little on assuring application integrity as
compared with the discussion of this theme in relation to networks.
There is little focus on data as a subject within the articles
comprising the sample dataset, suggesting that the domains that that
are concerned more with data-related risks, such as Records
Management (RM), and IA operate completely independently of one
another. Whereas RM focuses on data, IA focuses on the
infrastructure supporting data communication and processing. The
one exception to this general pattern is to be found in the area of data
privacy and security, which is at issue in both the RM and the IA
bodies of literature.
This is an important finding, since both domains claim to be
concerned with aspects of information assurance, broadly defined,
and suggests that IA researchers and practitioners may benefit from a
closer dialog with disciplines concerned with risks to data, such as
RM. This would allow the creation of a more integrated and holistic
view of risks to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of
information.
4

C O NC LUS I ON

While our investigation of the IA domain is on-going, initial
observations have shown what long-time IA researchers have
suspected: that the field focuses on network threats to the exclusion
of issues that endanger the privacy and confidentiality of
information. By understanding IA as it is now, we hope to aid future
researchers working to repair the gaps in IA’s collective vision.
The research also demonstrates the power of VA in supporting
researchers to rapidly process and gain insight from large datasets.
Our research team has been able to assimilate over 930 bibliographic
records in a fraction of the time it would take to analyse these
records using traditional linear review.
A C KN OW LED GM EN TS
The authors wish to thank Chris Rogers at the Media and
Interdisciplinary Graphics (MAGIC) Lab at the University of British
Columbia for his assistance to our research team. This work was
supported in part by a grant from the Boeing Corporation.
R E FE RE NC ES
[1]
[2]

http://www.nsa.gov/ia/ia_at_nsa/national_ia_glossary/index.shtml.
http://in-spire.pnnl.gov/whatsnew5.stm

