Guiding Security Analysis through Visualization
–
VAST 2011 Mini Challenge #2 Award: “High Potential for Scalability”

Lane Harrison ∗

Wenwen Dou †

Aidong Lu ‡

William Ribarsky §

Xiaoyu Wang ¶

Computer Science
UNC-Charlotte

A BSTRACT
We present a multiple views visualization for the security data in the
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 2. The visualization is used to monitor log event activity on the network log data included in the challenge. Interactions are provided that allow analysts to investigate
suspicious activity and escalate events as needed. Additionally, a
database application is used to allow SQL queries for more detailed
investigation.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces - Graphical User Interfaces (GUI); I.3.6 [Methodology and Techniques]: Interaction Techniques
1 I NTRODUCTION
The scenario of the 2011 VAST Mini Challenge 2 was to develop
a network monitoring visualization to “give insight as quickly and
clearly as possible in order to minimize the burden on the CNO
[computer network operations] team”. This application was to be
developed for the fictitious All Freight Corporation, a shipping
company which operates soley in the United States.
Several data sources were provided representing network operations on the All Freight network for several days. These included
network infrastructure and business priority information, firewall
log data, intrusion detection system (IDS) logs, Windows system
event logs, and more. See the challenge website for a complete list.
Given this data, participants were to design a visualization system to increase situational awareness. Furthermore, participants
were to use their system to answer a series of questions regarding
suspicious events, how early the events could be detected with their
system, and the resulting recommendations of changes to make to
the network.
The aim of the tool our team developed for this challenge was to
provide an automatically-updating overview of network event activity that analysts could monitor for anomalous activity. However,
we found it necessary to provide interactions to help analysts verify
suspicious activity before moving to other security tools.
2 D ESIGN P ROCESS AND A NALYST I NPUT
Part of the design process included a meeting with a security analyst who worked in a national bank’s headquarters. The meeting
lasted one hour and was held at the bank in their security operations
center. The meeting was informative, as the analyst explained how
each type of data in the challenge is used and analyzed in a large
corporate network.
∗ e-mail:

ltharri1@uncc.edu
wdou1@uncc.edu
‡ e-mail: aidong.lu@uncc.edu
§ e-mail: ribarsky@uncc.edu
¶ e-mail: xwang25@uncc.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

We presented our initial design, which was based on VisAlert [2].
VisAlert uses a radial display to show network events similar to the
data in the challenge. The analyst expressed preference for a nonradial display, which was noted in final design Additionally, the
analyst pointed out that the network infrastructure is valuable and
should be emphasized, as many corporate networks do not have this
information.
The analyst also demonstrated ArcSight [1], which they use for
their log management and day-to-day analysis. ArcSight maintains a database of all event activity, which is useful in correlating
events. Using ArcSight, the analyst was able to create time-based
histograms of network event activity as well as basic link graphs
that can show activity patterns between machines. However, the
main display of arcsight consists of a table view showing events as
they appear and a histogram of activity over time. Our final design
expands on this by providing multiple charts and an overview of the
network infrastructure.
Based on our meeting, we developed a simple multiple views visualization. To simplify the data management, the firewall, system
event, and intrusion detection logs were imported into a MySQL
database. Because the system event and intrusion detection logs
were not in a database readable format, Perl scripts were implemented to convert them into comma separated value (CSV) format
before importing. Navicat lite, a database management application,
was used to provide access to the database. During the analysis,
Navicat was used to execute queries as followups to suspicious activity.
3

V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION

The resulting visualization made use of the IDS, system, and firewall log data as well as the network infrastructure information.
While the system can update automatically as new events occur,
interactions are provided to assist analysts in classifying activity as
malicious or benign.
First, the network infrastructure is preserved as much as possible
in a node-link diagram. This will be referred to as the network
view. Nodes in the network change color based on which machines
are involved in a user-selected portion of the IDS and system log
charts. This allows the analyst to discover which machines were
involved in particular events.
Below the network view are two stacked bar charts. The top chart
shows intrusion detection log events over time, which each stack
division representing a different type of event. On the bottom is the
system event stacked bar chart. Like the intrusion detection chart,
each stack division in the system event chart represents a different
type of event. The charts show all the events from the previous three
hours.
Finally, on the right side is a simple text view that shows the
types of intrusion detection events, system events, and firewall
services used for a user-selected node in the current displayed
timerange. The services query usually took several seconds to run,
so it was only executed when a user clicked on a node.
The focus of this visualization was to increase situational aware-

317

Figure 1: (a) An overview of visualization used. (b) The dark red-pink color is one rarely seen and warranted investigation. (c) Shows a transition
in IDS event frequency. The bottom timestep has a few periods during which bursts of activity occur. This led to the discovery of the office
machines exhibiting malicious behavior.

meant. Furthermore, when we encountered an unfamiliar firewall
service, we would search the web to find if it was associated with
malicious activity.
Examples of visual events which triggered further investigation include significant changes in event frequency and unexpected
events. A change in frequency is reflected visually by a significant
change in network activity in a given time range when compared
to previous activity. An unexpected event typically was shown as
a color previously not seen in the barchart. Both of these are described in figure 1.
Since previous research has indicated that security analysts are
comfortable with SQL and command-line tools [3], we made use
of SQL queries to view the data in detail. The visualization proved
useful in guiding the query by narrowing the time-range, IP addresses/range, and ports or services to include in the search.

Figure 2: An overview of the analytical process and system.

ness and provide interactions that can help guide analysts in classifying and correlating suspicious activity. In the next section we
describe the analysis strategy we used to find malicious activity in
the All Freight network data (also see figure 2).
4

A NALYTICAL P ROCESS

Initially, we focused on monitoring the visualization for abnormal
or suspicious looking activity. When suspicious activity was encountered, the visualization interactions were used to determine
which machines were involved, what log events were triggered, and
what specific services were used (found in the firewall data).
Since we did not have access to a security professional for the
analysis portion of the challenge, we made use of the links provided
in the challenge description to determine what certain log events

318

5 C ONCLUSION
A security log visualization approach is described that focuses on
preserving network infrastructure information and providing interactions that help network defenders verify whether events are benign or malicious. Further investigation is supported by providing
access to the raw data via SQL queries which can be guided by
the visualization. Future iterations should incorporate other data
provided in the challenge, such as the Nessus report and business
priority information.
R EFERENCES
[1] ArcSight
ESM
Enterprise
Security
Manager.
http://www.arcsight.com/products/products-esm/.
[2] S. Foresti, J. Agutter, Y. Livnat, S. Moon, and R. Erbacher. Visual correlation of network alerts. Computer Graphcs and Applications (CG&A),
pages 1–12, Feb 2006.
[3] R. Thompson, E. Rantanen, W. Yurcik, and B. Bailey. Command line
or pretty lines?: comparing textual and visual interfaces for intrusion
detection. CHI ’07: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, Apr 2007.

