MobileAnalymator: Animating Data Changes on Mobile Devices
VAST2011 Mini Challenge 1 Award: Novel Extension of Visual Analytics to Mobile Devices
Yingjie Victor Chen∗

Zhenyu Cheryl Qian†

Li Zhang‡

Interaction Design

Interaction Design

Visual Communication Design

Purdue University

Purdue University

Purdue University

A BSTRACT
MobileAnalymator (Mobile Analysis Animator) is a visual analytic
system designed to analyze geospatial-temporal data on mobile devices. The system is an Internet based application that allows analysts to work in flexile enviornments at anytime. Its client side is
developed by Adobe Flash to animate and interact with data. The
server side uses Java and MySQL to query, compute, and serve data.
The analyst can run the analytical task from a tablet (or computer)
with Internet connection. MobileAnalymator adopted spatial and
temporal autocorrelations in the interface design and integrated tangible interaction in the navigation to support analysis process.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces; H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Visual Analytics; I.3.6 [Methodology and Techniques]: Interaction Techniques
1

I NTRODUCTION

The market of tablet computers such as Apple Ipad and Android
Tablets is growing rapidly (eight percent of US adults own a tablet
in May 2011, growing from five percent in November 2010) - some
researchers even predicted that the sales of tablets would reach 208
millions in 2014. These tablets offer good balance upon mobility and computing power (in term of display size, CPU, and storage). It is now possible to execute complex visual analytical tasks
with tablets, which gives analysts the power to promptly response
to emergencies at any time any location. The design of MobileAnalymator (Figure 1) is motivated by this significant trend.

“Everything is connected to everything else, but near things are
more related than distant things”[2]. Geospatial-temporal analytics takes both spatial and temporal autocorrelations into account
and aims to understand historical patterns of behavior. A successful visualization tool should relieve the user’s cognitive load [3]
and represent the complicated data in a way which is understandable and analyzable. We look forward to innovating the geospatialtemporal visualization methods and bringing the VA tools closer to
normal users’ lives. The task of the VAST 2011 Epidemic Spread
mini challenge is to identify the origins and transmission methods
of a dramatic increase of flu-like disease taking place in a major
metropolitan area. The analysis process, in our mind, should be
flexible, interesting, and rewarding.
2 O UR TOOL
The two innovative aspects of MobileAnalymator came from the
consideration of user needs:
• Be flexible and easy to use: We want to give analysts the
freedom to work in flexible environments. Motorola Xoom
(with 3G/Wifi internet connection) was chosen as the testing
platform. Also the analyst should be able to work in any web
browsers. We need to solve the challenge of organizing complex analysis interactions into a relatively small touchscreen.
• Multiple visualization methods: Because of the complexity
of geospatial-temporal data and human’s limited attention and
visual memory, we need to deploy and explore multiple ways
of visualization. In this project, we use node-link graphs and
animations to simulate changes in front of the eyes and expect
the salient movements can reveal implicit stories.
2.1 Interaction Design Challenges on a Mobile Device
To achieve the design goals, we were facing several specific and
crucial interaction design problems:
1. Limited screen space: Although Xoom’s screen resolution is
1280x800, its display area is relatively small (10.1 inch). To
maintain the readability, we reserved the most part of screen
for the map and created two map variations (grey scale and
dark shaded). We fit other information (e.g. statical blogs
curve and weather/wind information) into a zoomable area on
the bottom. The user can expand shrinked mode (Figure 1) to
see details when needed (Figure 2).

Figure 1: Use keywords “vomiting”, “diarrhea”, “nausea” and “heartburn” to detect the waterborne illness.
∗ e-mail:chen489@purdue.edu
† e-mail:qianz@purdue.edu
‡ e-mail:lzhang3@purdue.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

2. Finger as pointing device: To improve the accuracy of finger
pointing, we made each button bigger than one square centimeter, and kept enough gaps between buttons.
3. Comfortable menu location: When the analyst is holding the
tablet, a top or bottom menu is comparably inconvenient. We
designed the interface so that the user can use The menu can
be easily shifted to the left if needed.
4. Maintain the analysis context: The analyst switches between
different modes or edit parameters to explore. MobileAnalymator keeps all the context information (parameters and selections) during the switching so that the user won’t feel lost.

313

5. Avoid over-fancy: Animating the bloggers navigating on the
map is very interesting. We considered using 3D representation and gave up this idea. In this context, 3D views won’t
improve the data visualization a lot and also we are limited by
the computerize power of a mobile device.

Figure 2: On demand to zoom in the statical curve and display text
content of selected blogs

Another challenge on system design is the limited computing
power (CPU and storage of a tablet computer). It is not practical
(and not secure, hard to maintain) to load large amounts of data in
a mobile device. The client-server architecture of Internet based
application naturally solves this problem. The client side running
on the tablet just needs to handle interaction, communication, and
display. The heavy computing work, data storage and management are left to the server: (1) queuing records by creation time
and keywords from the database, (2) tracing movement of bloggers
through querying his/her blogs within a given period, and (3) tracing human-to-human contacts by checking blogs created with in a
closed location and a short time range.
We chose Adobe Flash as the client side application to work
with graphics and animation. Flash is very popular, supported by
over 99% of Internet viewers including Google Android tablets.
The Flash client receives users interaction, send parameters to the
server, and displays feedback data.
MobileAnalymator has three modes to display blog messages:
by time (default mode showing frames (one hour to a day) of
data), by people (displays the changes and linkages of blogs created within certain periods in a node-link graph), and by animation
(animates the dots’ movements to visualize blogger’s active range).
3

A NALYZING

WITH

M OBILE A NALYMATOR

MobileAnalymator starts from the by time mode. We can input keywords to highlight interesting blogs, or filter out unwanted blogs
from the display. We are able to check two things in this mode: 1.
highlighted blogs. 2. abnormal clustered blogs. In this challenge,
we started from flu related keywords (e.g. fever, cough, and chill) to
highlight blogs and observed flu symptoms developed every hour.
From clustered blogs, we identified several accidents such as explosion in smogtown, airplane crash, sports games, car accidents,
and traffics along highways. From highlighted blogs, we easily noticed that suddenly a lot of sick blogs appeared on May 18th. We
can select these blogs to view their content (Figure 2). In the early
morning of 18th, most of these highlighted blogs talked about their
friends got sick. After 8 am, most highlighted blogs started to talk
about they themselves were sick. We can set up the parameter to
display blogs at a interval of several (e.g. 3) hours. The affected
area become much more clear and display like an expanding shape.
If we assume the disease was transmitted by the west wind from

314

the central to the east, how do people in west got sick later? We selected this group and used by people mode to trace their movement
during the past 12 hours. It is very clear that they all traveled from
downtown or Eastside and had already got sick there (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Trace sick bloggers who blogged at night May 18th in Villa
and Eastside (the blogger moved from the dark shade end to the
bright yellow end).

What happened during the last 72 hours? The by animation
mode animates bloggers movement by their blogs’ creation time
and location. By default it shows the selected bloggers’ movements
during the last 24 hours. It provides the same results as by people
mode: showing people came from downtown. The animation of
a longer period (last three days) gives a clearer story. Sick people
travelled between the downtown and Westside. But on the third day,
most of them had to go to different hospitals. Sick people in other
areas (south and north) show the similar moving pattern.
The statistic graph is almost flat and does not suggest personto-person transmission, so we double checked human contacts by
reviewing blogs created at similar place and similar time (distance
with in a given range and created within a certain period) and tracing these bloggers. This tracing can be both forward and backward.
We did not found any evidence of human transmission.
4 L ESSONS L EARNED AND F UTURE O PPORTUNITIES
MobileAnalymator successfully facilitated the process of identifying the ground zero location of the airborne illness. However, we
totally neglected the waterborne illness. We reviewed the process
and found that we forgot to use keywords such as “vomiting” and
“diarrhea” to investigate. Using the same approach as investigating the airborne illness, the analyst can easily identify the illness is
closely related with the lower branch of the river (Figure 1).
Alexander George listed five obvious problems when analysts
decide - all of these problems are related to not being able to access alternatives broad enough (e.g. Select first answer that appears “good enough”)[1]. It seems that, as an analyst, we made
exactly the same mistake during this analyzing process. This mistake suggests that there are missing components in the system and
may lead to new research opportunities - how the system can give
an overview of the content (e.g. keywords change over time) and
remind the analyst to study all possible keywords (may generate
many alternative scenarios)?
R EFERENCES
[1] A. George. Presidential Decisionmaking in Foreign Policy: The Effective Use of Information and Advice. Westview Press, Boulder, CO,
1980.
[2] W. Tobler. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the detroit
region. Economic Geography, 46(2), 1970.
[3] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, second edition, 2004.

