SensePlace2: GeoTwitter Analytics Support for Situational Awareness
Alan M. MacEachren

1,2,3

1,3

1,2

1,2

1,2

, Anuj Jaiswal , Anthony C. Robinson , Scott Pezanowski , Alexander Savelyev , Prasenjit
1,3
1,4
1,2
Mitra , Xiao Zhang , and Justine Blanford

1

2

3

GeoVISTA Center , Department of Geography , College of Information Sciences and Technology , and Computer Science &
4
Engineering , The Pennsylvania State University

ABSTRACT
Geographically-grounded situational awareness (SA) is critical to
crisis management and is essential in many other decision making
domains that range from infectious disease monitoring, through
regional planning, to political campaigning. Social media are
becoming an important information input to support situational
assessment (to produce awareness) in all domains. Here, we
present a geovisual analytics approach to supporting SA for crisis
events using one source of social media, Twitter. Specifically, we
focus on leveraging explicit and implicit geographic information
for tweets, on developing place-time-theme indexing schemes that
support overview+detail methods and that scale analytical
capabilities to relatively large tweet volumes, and on providing
visual interface methods to enable understanding of place, time,
and theme components of evolving situations. Our approach is
user-centered, using scenario-based design methods that include
formal scenarios to guide design and validate implementation as
well as a systematic claims analysis to justify design choices and
provide a framework for future testing. The work is informed by a
structured survey of practitioners and the end product of Phase-I
development is demonstrated / validated through implementation
in SensePlace2, a map-based, web application initially focused on
tweets but extensible to other media.
KEYWORDS: social media analytics, scenario-based design,
geovisualization, situational awareness, text analytics, crisis
management, spatio-temporal analysis.
INDEX TERMS: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Information Search and Retrieval—Information filtering,
relevance feedback; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and
Representation]: User Interfaces—Graphical user interfaces,
Evaluation/methodology.
1

INTRODUCTION

Establishing and maintaining Situational Awareness (SA) is a
fundamental requirement for effective crisis management. The
information contained in social media has been recognized by the
crisis management community (e.g., the August, 2010 Red Cross
Emergency Social Data Summit [1]) and by researchers in crisis
informatics [2] as a potentially rich source of time-critical
information that can enhance situational awareness and alert
practitioners to events and situations needing their attention.
Leveraging social media for crisis situational awareness remains a
challenge. Reasons include: large volumes of information, limited
means to sort relevant from irrelevant information (with relevance
including thematic and geographic components), challenges to
distinguish reliable from unreliable information, and limited tools
to extract meaning from the generally ill-structured and cryptic
formats used in social media applications.
LEAVE 0.5 INCH SPACE AT BOTTOM OF LEFT
COLUMN
ON FIRST
PAGE
FOR Science
COPYRIGHT
BLOCK
IEEE Symposium
on Visual
Analytics
and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

This paper reports on development of a web-based geovisual
analytics application, SensePlace2, through which information
contained in social media can be gathered and analyzed to support
situational awareness in crisis management and related application
domains i. The initial SensePlace2 version is focused on foraging
for and sensemaking with crisis-relevant information extracted
from Twitter. Twitter is a starting point for our ongoing work
because it is the most widely used microblogging application,
with the number of ‘tweets’ reaching 110 million per day in
January, 2011 and escalating (http://tiny.cc/s8pbc). Twitter is also
special among social media because most tweets are public, thus
tweets are more useful for situational assessment than other social
media. Plus, the 140 character limit of tweets, the increased use of
hash tags (particularly for crisis situations), and the potential for
precise tweet locations all add to potential usefulness. Twitter, of
course, is only one data source for SA and Twitter has a user age
bias in the 25-55 age range. Thus, while this paper focuses on
Twitter as the information source, the software architecture is
extensible to ingest any relevant text sources.
A focus of the research reported is web-based place-time-theme
foraging and filtering of tweet content within a visual interface
that provides geographic, temporal, and thematic overview and
detail as well as support for analysis histories. In this paper, we
focus particularly on leveraging: explicit geographic information
in tweets (when users add place or coordinate information to
tweets), explicit (but imprecise) geographic information contained
in the user’s profile (their timezone), and implicit geographic
information that can be inferred through identification of placerelated hashtags or automated entity extraction methods. An
example view from the interface is shown in Fig. 1.
The key innovation presented in this paper is the integration of
linked visual-computational methods and a place-time-entity
conceptual framework in a working prototype grounded in both
theory and practice informed by a structured survey of
professionals and guided by scenario-based design methods [3, 4].
In subsequent sections we provide background, present results of
the practitioner survey, provide an overview of the application and
its architecture, outline our use of scenario-based design and
demonstrate that SensePlace 2 can support it, present a second
brief use case, and sketch our plans for future work.

Fig. 1. SensePlace2 interface: time constraint on query for ‘Haiti
supplies' plus spatial selection of relevant results.

181

2

BACKGROUND

Here we provide a brief overview of selected research streams that
are directly relevant to our visual analytics approach for utilizing
social media to support crisis management SA.
2.1
Situational Awareness
Endsley [5] described SA as a three-part process of perception,
comprehension, and projection (into the future to make
predictions) that leads to decision making and then to actions.
Klein [6] argues that sensemaking and SA are distinct; he
contends that SA is about the knowledge state of individuals
tasked with monitoring and interpreting a situation and making
decisions about how to act. Sensemaking, in contrast, is
characterized as a process. But, SA depends on a process of
situational assessment. The process of sensemaking as outlined by
Pirolli and Card [7], although originally developed to model
intelligence analysis, also provides a framework for how the
initial two stages of the SA process are (or should be) carried out.
Endsley’s ‘perception’ is supported through the foraging loop and
‘comprehension’ is supported through the sensemaking loop. The
outcome of the sensemaking loop in crisis management is often a
‘projection’ about the future situation given the comprehended
current situation plus estimates of changes in the forces driving
the crisis and/or responses to it by professionals and the public.
In the domain of power grid operations, Greitzer, et al [8] make
a strong case for application of a sensemaking perspective to SA.
One of their key points is that traditional information technology
support for SA has focused on increasing information throughput,
thus scaling human capabilities to process information. They
argue that a sensemaking approach addresses SA at a deeper level
with a focus on understanding the process through which analysts
construct a “plausible ‘story’ of what is going on.” They then
propose that it is important to explicitly enable strategies for
organizing information into coherent “chunks” and for defining
“explicit connections across levels of abstraction to improve
awareness of patterns and relationships”.
For SA in a domain like crisis management in which “place” is
critical, the now classic approach to organizing information into
place, time, and concept/theme components is a logical basis for
organizing a visual interface that supports foraging and
sensemaking activities generally along with more specific SA
tasks such as information chunking and the identification of
patterns and relationships (for background on place-time-object
models for information representation and use, see [9], [10, 11],
and [12, 13]). A place-time-object organization of information
enables users to pose the fundamental where, what, and when
questions that are critical to SA.
In spite of the potential for visual analytics to enable SA, there
has been relatively little attention in visual analytics to SA as an
goal. One exception is work by Livnat, et al [14] who review the
core concepts of SA and focus specifically on applying what they
term the w3 premise; that events have where, what, when
attributes. They propose a visualization paradigm that addresses
these attributes explicitly in the visual representation and
interaction mechanisms of tools to support SA; the paradigm
combines all components into a ring-based depiction. In one of
several examples, they describe application of their visual
representation device to visual analysis of event correlation to
support emergency awareness. The explicit recognition of where,
what, and when is also central to work on application of geovisual
analytics to SA reported by Tomaszewksi and colleagues [15-17].
An important component of that research is a conceptual and
practical framework for developing information foraging and
sensemaking tools that help analysts find and process documents
ingested into an analytical process of geo-historical (space-time)

182

context creation to underpin information interpretation in crisis
and humanitarian situations.
In other research with a crisis management focus, Kim et al [18]
introduce mobile devices with map-based visual analytics
methods providing SA support for emergency response; but they
do not adopt a particular conceptual approach to SA nor do they
focus explicitly on any systematic analysis of SA strategies or
tools. In contrast, Kohlhammer, et al [19] introduce a visual
analytics approach to decision-making grounded in an
understanding of both SA and naturalistic decision-making. In
relation to SA, they cite Endsley’s [20] three levels and describe
the comprehension step as based on synthesis of disjoint elements
to “form a holistic picture” that includes understanding of object
and event significance. They argue that visual analytics methods
for SA must go well beyond enabling information perception to
support comprehension in the context of existing goals.
Several key insights derived from work on SA outlined above
guide work reported here. First, we have derived a three-part
working definition of crisis management SA: the process of
determining the state of the world relevant to crisis management
goals, the result of that determination (the knowledge state), and
the use of the knowledge achieved to make decisions about action
or predictions about future states. Second, since place and time
are critical to crisis management, we adopt a place-time-theme
approach to foraging for and sensemaking with fragmented data.
Third, we consider understanding of object and event significance
and identifying connections across levels of abstraction to be
critical to SA and focus (in initial work reported here) on using
integrated overview-detail methods applied to both place and time
to facilitate that understanding.
2.2
Social Media in Crisis Management
Social media have been acknowledged by many in the crisis
management research and practice communities as a tool for both
communicating and collecting information and a growing body of
research reflects this interest and development [21-23]. Twitter
specifically has drawn considerable research attention as a tool to
gather information, disseminate information, coordinate actions,
and support SA [24-27].
In work with a specific geographic component, Vieweg, et al
[2] provide evidence that microblogs, using Twitter or other
means, have a potential role in enabling common SA among
practitioners in crisis situations. Specifically, Vieweg and
colleagues collected, hand coded, and analyzed tweets during a
pair of concurrent events (a grass fire in Oklahoma and a flooding
event on the Red River having impacts from Winnipeg, MB to
Fargo, ND). They were able to identify both geo-location and
situational update information in Tweets that are directly relevant
to building SA. The authors concluded that most local users will
include geolocation in at least one event-relevant tweet and that
geolocation information will differ in kind and amount depending
on the nature of the crisis event and the stage within the crisis
lifecycle (e.g., in the grassland fire event, geolocation information
was included in 40% of all on-topic tweets, but only 18% of ontopic flood event tweets contained location information). They
also found that place-relevant information occurred without
specific locations mentioned in 6-8% of tweets (e.g., west central
edge of town). In relation to situational update information,
approximately half of on-topic Tweets in both events included
situational update information. One additional finding is that
tweets with either geolocation or situational update information
are both more likely to be retweeted than tweets in general.
The concept of volunteered geographic information (VGI) is a
complementary research area focused on utilizing the potential of
crowd-sourcing to generate useful geographic information to
support many activities. These range from basic mapping (e.g.,

Open Street Map) to direct support for crisis management risk
communication (e.g., CrisisMappers.org, Ushahidi). Zook, et al
[28]) provide a recent overview of VGI/social media applied to
crisis management with a focus on Haiti.
Drawing from sources cited and many others, we identify five
distinct uses for social media in crisis management:
a) to disseminate information to the public (e.g., for alerts)
b) to gather information from the public (e.g., crowdsourcing)
c) to coordinate with crisis management professionals
d) to monitor activities of crisis management professionals
e) as input to situational assessment for crisis management
2.3
Social Media Mapping & Analytics
There is a growing volume of research on analytical methods to
leverage Twitter and other social media-derived information for
many applications, including crisis management, investigative
journalism, and political analysis. Here, we highlight a few key
developments that informed our work.
Dörk, etl al [29] present a strategy for using Twitter (and related
microblogging) as a “backchannel” for ongoing live events.
Through experience developing and using their Visual
Backchannel interface, they identify four design goals: summarize
the conversation, integrate the ‘now’ with the ‘recent’, extend
presence of the present (make now persist long enough to be
useful), provide flexible time windows, make visual activity
adjustable (through query and filtering), and encode organic feel.
In research that is mostly analytical, Shamma, et al [30] present
results on identifying structure and semantics in microblogging
(via Twitter) about media events and providing that information
back to the microbloggers to enhance their experience, e.g., by
uncovering emerging topics and trends in real time. Their
approach includes attention to message frequency, message length
(which are shorter during key parts of the event), number of
messages with an @ designation (also fewer during the most
interesting parts), and how conversational tweets are.
Diakopoulos, et al [31] integrate analytical methods with a
visual interface to support journalists’ use of Twitter to
supplement other information sources. They ground the work in
the Pirolli and Card [7] sensemaking model. Their research focus
is on extracting and representing relevant information from large
streams of Twitter (or other social media). The approach and tools
utilize computational content analysis methods that address four
tasks: judging uniqueness, analyzing and classifying sentiment,
assessing relevance, and extracting keywords. The latter two are
also a focus in the SensePlace2 application we present below.
In work with photo sharing sites rather than tweets, Andrienko,
et al [32] introduce a set of analytical techniques focused on
reconstructing past events from activity traces. The tools integrate
geovisualization, geocomputation, and statistical analysis methods
that support integrated analysis of the spatial, temporal, and
thematic components of data that includes both numeric attributes
and text. The approach is able to scale to fairly large data sets due
to a previously developed strategy for territory tessellation [33].
Ideas about both tessellation (to create overviews) and strategies
(for space-time-theme parsing of information) informed decisions
on SensePlace2.
Field and O’Brien [34], also with a geographic focus, present
ideas on web-mapping of tweets. Citing the lack of attention to
cartographic design and map usability of most existing efforts to
map tweets, they propose strategies for representing multiple
coincident messages in intuitive ways. They also describe a
successful case study in which students in a field course used
Twitter to support real-time collaboration on an assignment that
required coordinated data collection and integration of the
information collected (thus an activity not unlike those undertaken
during crisis management).

3

SURVEY OF PRACTITIONERS

Here we present results of a structured survey of crisis/emergency
management professionals who responded to questions about
potential uses of social media in crisis management and provided
feedback on an early design mockup for SensePlace2.
Understanding User Needs
3.1
As an input to our tool design and development process, we
completed a needs assessment study with two primary goals: (1)
to develop a clear understanding of how emergency management
professionals currently use social media tools and (2) to elicit
what emergency management professionals envision doing with
social media geovisual analytics tools in the future.
To address these goals, we developed a 21 question survey
delivered on-line using SurveyMonkey. To recruit participants,
we posted a request to the International Association of Emergency
Managers (IAEM) listserv and to FirstResponder.gov. Our request
yielded 46 respondents. A few questions were skipped by one or a
few respondents, thus some received fewer than 46 responses. The
first survey question asked about work experience in emergency
management. Respondents had a high level of expertise overall;
the majority (53.7%) had over 9 years of experience, while 22%
had between 6-9 years, 2.4% between 3-6 years, 12.2% between
1-3 years, and 9.8% claimed no experience working in emergency
management.
The following sections reveal what we learned from this survey
on our two key research goals: the current use of social media,
and the envisioned use of geovisual tools that support social
media analysis. Our results are reported with percentages for
questions that allow multiple options to be selected, and by
average subjective rating for questions that use a 5-point Likert
agree/disagree scale.
3.2
Current Use of Social Media
To begin understanding how social media is used by emergency
management professionals, we asked participants to characterize
their use of social media tools in personal, professional, and crisis
management settings. Facebook (97.4%), LinkedIn (68.4%), and
Twitter (63.2%) are most common for personal use. For
professional purposes, LinkedIn (67.9%), Twitter (53.6%), and
Facebook (53.6%) are most common. With respect to crisis
management activities (Fig. 2a), participants primarily use text
messages to communicate with other professionals (60.9%),
Facebook or other “friend” networks (52.2%), Twitter to gather
information from the public (43.5%), and text messaging to
communicate with the public (43.5%).
We also asked participants to assign a rating to the usefulness
of microblogging tools like Twitter for each of the four key
phases of crisis management (mitigation, preparedness, response,
and recovery). Microblogging tools are currently considered to be
more useful for response and recovery activities than for
mitigation and preparedness (Fig. 2b).
Next, we asked participants to rate the usefulness of tools like
Twitter for specific emergency management tasks. Our results
suggest that such tools are most useful for dissemination,
information gathering, and as inputs to situational assessment.
There is weaker agreement that such tools are useful for
monitoring other emergency management personnel or
coordinating their activities (Fig. 2e). We did not provide or
collect definitions of SA from respondents. However, one of us
has been a member of the IAEM listserv since 2004 and identified
137 posts since then that mention SA; the emphasis in these posts
is on both the state of being aware of all factors relevant to
successful planning, response, and recovery as well as on the
process of achieving that awareness.

183

A

D

B

E

C

F
Fig. 2. Results from survey of emergency management personnel.

3.3
Envisioned Use of Geovisual Tools
In the second major portion of our survey, we shifted focus
toward how participants envision using geovisual tools that can
take advantage of social media data sources. To begin, we asked
participants to identify which types of geographic information
they would find useful, and to tell us which types of maps they
would expect to see in new social media enabled tools.
Participants indicated that both the locations mentioned in or
relevant to the contributed information (86.1%) and location of
the person generating the information (80.6%) are useful for crisis
management activities. Additionally, participants responded that
they would find maps that show both types of geographic
information at once to be maximally useful (Fig. 2c).
We then asked participants to identify the tools and features
expected in an interactive, web-based application designed to
incorporate social media as an information resource for crisis
management (Fig. 2d). Maps (94.7%), photos/video collections
(71.1%), time graphs (60.5%), keyword clouds (57.9%) and
clustering tools (47.4%) were among the most popular choices.
Further, we asked participants to identify types of information
they would expect to be able to analyze in the same type of
application (Fig. 2f). Incidents (91.9%), sequence of events
(83.8%), geographic information (81.1%), people (67.6%), and
organizations (59.5%) were the most expected information types.

184

In a final series of questions, we asked participants to review a
graphical mockup of the SensePlace2 interface (Fig. 3). First, we
asked participants to describe how they might use such an
application. 14 of the 25 total responses collected for this question
highlighted its potential use to support situational awareness
activities. The next most popular response category (4 responses)

Fig. 3. SensePlace 2 mockup used in survey.

focused on its potential to support decision making during a crisis.
The remaining five responses called for narrower use cases
(logistical support, for example) or did not highlight a use case
because they were unclear about the application’s purpose.
Next, we asked participants what types of information or results
they would expect to be able to share with colleagues if they were
to use an application like SensePlace2. This poll revealed that
printable maps (97%), a link that would launch the application
with preloaded data (63.6%), pre-formatted text reports (51.5%)
and static screen captures (51.5%) were preferred (Fig. 4).
Finally, we asked participants to tell us which tools/features
they would add to our design, and which tools/features they
suggest could be removed. We collected 18 responses to the
former question, and the most popular suggestions (6 responses)
were tools that would enhance data interoperability with
additional media sources (photos and streaming video), and
import/export capability to support flexible information sharing.
The next most common category of new feature suggestions
focused on enhanced reporting capabilities to create written
reports and disseminate those quickly/easily to other analysts (4
responses). We also noted suggestions for more sophisticated
mapping tools (3 responses) and basic interface controls to resize
windows and exchange visualization elements (2 responses).
We collected 13 responses to our question asking participants to
highlight features they would remove from our design, and the
most popular suggestion was to remove the tag cloud (6
responses). In second place (5 responses) our participants said
they would not change anything.
The results of our survey suggest that those in the emergency
management domain are actively using social media tools, that
they expect to be able to explore multiple kinds of geography
associated with social media, and that they anticipate making use
of this information primarily for SA activities. Our results provide
a roadmap for current and future design iterations of SensePlace2
that include functionality for mapping tools, data interoperability
and ingest features, and analytical reporting capabilities.
4

APPLICATION DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

This section introduces our design process and initial system
implementation and testing. First, we outline the scenario-based
design (SBD) development process applied [4], initial
SensePlace2 functionality it prompts, and present an SBD claims
analysis focused on key design choices. Second, we detail the
tweet processing system. Third, we report on initial validity
assessment of that tweet processing.
4.1
SBD & SensePlace2 Functionality
Our tool and interface design approach follows SBD principles
[3]. SDB is a method and set of techniques through which future
system use is concretely described early in development.
Development is guided by narrative descriptions of envisioned use
episodes to achieve a system enabling these use experiences. The

Fig. 4. Responses about sharing information.

process includes a sequence of four scenario types: problem,
activity, information, and interaction. Space does not permit a
detailed discussion of all SBD scenarios used in our design
process; one led to the mockup assessed in the practitioner survey
reported above, a sequence of others led to the system as detailed
below. We present one composite, abbreviated scenario that we
use here: (a) to illustrate design goals (derived from past work
with practitioners, practitioner survey input, and review of
scientific literature and current practice) and (b) as a mechanism
(together with the accompanying video demonstration of
capabilities) to validate the SensePlace2 implementation.
4.1.1
SBD example scenario
In our scenario (demonstrated with SensePlace2 and real data),
a hypothetical emergency management professional (Karen)
working for a hypothetical international emergency response
organization (the International Crisis Response Agency - ICRA)
has been tasked with monitoring Twitter feeds from the U.S. and
neighboring countries as input to SA during the aftermath of the
Haiti 2010 earthquake. One primary ICRA objective that Karen is
focusing on is to identify activities and attitudes related to the
relief effort that might not be included in official situation reports
from the government agencies and NGOs involved. She is
particularly interested in efforts to gather and send relief supplies
and to provide support for refugees who are displaced by events.
In relation to relief supplies, many organizations as well as
individuals will attempt to contribute supplies, provide logistical
support, and even to travel to the crisis location to help. The
donation and delivery of supplies by volunteers can be ineffective
or even disruptive since response organizations may be unaware
of volunteer efforts until those efforts have generated too many of
some supplies, too few of others, and perhaps have even tried to
ship supplies before facilities are available to accept them.
Karen starts her situational assessment with an initial overview
of all tweets from the past 6 months that include “Haiti” as a
location; this provides a general context within which to interpret
interpret activities. The heatmap shows considerable activity
across the globe but little clear structure; thus some narrowing of
focus is needed to uncover useful information on the current state
of affairs in Haiti and what supplies may be needed. Karen first
looks at the most relevant 500 tweets, but this does not look useful
since it starts with tweets about the Haitian Ambassador giving a
press conference. She begins to drill down to more useful
information by dragging the timeline handle to limit the time
range to 10 weeks leading up to the present. Karen then decides to
start by investigating tweets about supplies related to Haiti by
adding “supplies” to the query. This creates some results that look
more useful; she finds information about supply shipments and by
mousing over the 3rd tweet finds that “Starkville” is in Mississippi
and that a ship that started there cleared customs and will arrive
tomorrow in Port au Prince (illustrated in Fig. 1).
Next, Karen reviews the most recent tweets by sorting the tweet
list by time. By clicking on some of the tweets at the top, she finds
several tweets from “Today’s News Network” that are not news to
her but also finds that Yele Haiti and the Carma Foundation have
partnered for medical supplies and aid (Fig. 5). Karen goes back
to relevance order by clicking on the relevance column. Then
Karen notices a couple locations on the map having fairly large
numbers of tweets, so she clicks on the large circles in Tampa,
Sarasota and Port Everglades; this brings those tweets to the top
of the list. From this, she sees that a cargo ship has left Port
Everglades, some supplies arrived in Sarasota, and the President
of Haiti will be accepting school supplies in Tampa.
While much of the activity in moving supplies is going through
Florida, Karen is also interested in understanding the status of
activities in other parts of the country. So, she changes the query

185

Fig. 5. Use of temporal sorting to find organizational activities.

to the somewhat broader topic of “Haiti Relief” and uses the Altclick spatial search feature pointing at Louisville, KY to identify
the 500 closest relevant tweets. She Ctrl-clicks two tweets,
bringing them to the top of the list (Fig. 6). Karen is surprised at
the range of fundraising activities that ICRA was not aware of.
4.1.2
SensePlace2 functionality
The SensePlace2 interface includes 5 core components: query
panel, timeline display/control, tweet list, tweet map, and history
view. Each component is described in more detail below.
Query Panel: The query panel provides a minimalistic interface
to specify terms for text-based queries.
Timeline display/control: The Timeline control supports query
filtering with time range sliders. A ‘heatbar’ signifies tweet
density over time using a sequential color scheme with dark red
representing high frequency. An ordinal histogram (a variant of a
sparkline) above the heatbar signifies normalized query frequency
results, divided into low (non-zero), medium, and high.
Tweet list: The tweet list depicts the 500 most relevant tweets
for any query. Tweet text along with accompanying metadata
(posting date, user profile image and relevance ranking) is
displayed as a scrollable list. The default term frequency-based
Lucene relevance rating is not very discriminating for tweets. So,
we use Lucene’s "boosting" (weighting) mechanism; weighting is
adjustable. Our default weights (in rank order) by incidence of:
places, organizations, hashtags, and dates/currency/times. To
enhance list readability, a color-coded strip on each tweet depicts
its relevance ranking. The list can be sorted by relevance (the
default), time, and location. To support the survey request for
access to photos and video, URLs in tweets are live links.
Tweet map: Following logic outlined in the background section,
the tweet map supports simultaneous tweet distribution overview
and detail plus an ability to select places or apply spatial filtering.
A heatmap provides the overview (gridded with transparent fill
using the same sequential color scheme as on the timeline). It
depicts tweet frequency filtered by concept, time, and place query
specifications; frequency is grouped into 5 quantile categories.
Ideally, tweet frequency would be normalized. But there is no
clear method for normalization that will be consistently valid.
Options include: total population per cell (this can be obtained
from the global population grid data set but those data have zero
values for ocean cells even though tweets can come from ships
within sight of some event); twitter accounts/cell (a value that is
probably not possible to obtain); or the 'at risk' population (e.g., if
the focus is on flooding, normalization could calculate population
at specific elevations). Thus, our initial implementation uses raw
frequency per cell. A gridded heatmap is used rather than a
choropleth map (in which political unit shading represents data
magnitude) because: (a) choropleth maps are misleading if counts
rather than normalized data are depicted; with no clear choice on
how to normalize data, territories are normalized through a regular
tessellation; (b) a grid map provides a better overview because it

186

Fig. 6. Use of spatial query to find regional activities.

avoids the visual distraction of political units (which are irrelevant
for many crisis events). Locations for the top 500 tweets are
highlighted with graded circle sizes (small = 1-5, medium = 6-15,
large = >15). To meet needs identified in the survey, from and
about location is distinguished, with from in green and about in
purple. Clicking on a location highlights linked tweets and moves
them to the top of the tweet list. Ctrl-click allows multiple
locations to be selected. The map has normal pan and zoom
controls but also serves as an interface to spatial filtering; Altclick finds the 500 relevant tweets closest to the clicked location.
History view: Whereas the query panel, timeline and tweet list
define, display and refine query content, the history view stores
queries for reuse (a step toward the “launch with preloaded data”
request from the survey). Currently this view provides a dropdown menu of each query as a combination of thematic, temporal
and spatial filters used and presented in natural language terms for
easy review.
A new query can be initialized in two ways - by using the query
panel to enter new key words or by using the timeline or spatial
query tool to set the time frame or locality of study. In either case,
as soon as the new query is launched it is recorded and displayed
in the history view. After the query returns, the timeline control,
tweet list and tweet map are updated. An existing query can be
refined in three ways. First, key words can be adjusted, second, a
new spatial query can be launched to refine the original location,
and third, timeline controls can be adjusted. Similar to launching a
new query, those changes will be recorded in the history view and
reflected in timeline control, tweet list and tweet map.
4.1.3
SensePlace2 SBD claims analysis
SBD claims analysis identifies system features expected to have
important consequences for users. Claims about the features
represent both a justification for initial design decisions and
testable contentions to follow up on in subsequent user testing.
Figure 7 details key claims for SensePlace2 as presented here.
4.2
SensePlace2 Architecture
A primary task to support SA is collecting tweets about specific
topics relevant to crisis management, i.e. earthquake, tsunami, etc,
and then storing these tweets in a format conducive to interactive
analysis. To achieve these goals we wrote a distributed twitter
crawler integrated with a postGRES database for storage. Our
crawler utilizes the Twitter API that returns relevant tweets to
user-input keywords (‘earthquake’, ‘cyclone’, etc.) within a
seven-day period. The API calls return up to 1000 relevant tweets
and auxiliary metadata (e.g., creation time, tweet id, user id etc.)
in JSON format. Data are parsed, cleaned, and written to a
postGRES database. When tweets corresponding to a keyword are
stored, we also store the most recent tweet id retrieved for a
keyword. We then also query the Twitter API using the keyword
and the most recent tweet id for the 1000 most recent tweets. In

Organizing the interface to support query and display using
separate map, timeline, and text views
+ fits with a standard conceptualization of the world into place,
time, and theme components
+ enables what, where, when questions
+ provides context for events that are happening in place
- may under-represent important people and organizations
- may emphasize dimensions of events and processes over the
events and processes themselves
The combination of heatmap depicting overall frequency and
graduated circle depiction of the relevant from & about tweets
+ provides integrated overview + detail
+ allows an analyst to quickly explore places w/relevant info
- may hide relevant tweets that do not make the 500 cut-off
- may be confusing to analysts who are only familiar with typical
web maps with limited use of abstract symbols
The heatbar and ordinal histogram combination
+ supports simultaneous overview + detail allowing analysts to
understand the temporal context for relevant query results
+ allows analysts to quickly zero in on key events
- may prompt analysts to focus too much attention on active
times / events versus the most important tweets
Analytical recall supported by natural language query list
+ supports recall of past search parameters using easy to
understand language
+ helps the analyst understand the fundamental questions
asked by combinations of interactions
- may not help analysts quickly browse to identify particularly
important/unimportant results
Keyword search as a an input to exploration and analysis
+ is a method that most users will expect and one that requires
little or no training to understand
+ matches the fact that the underlying data is a text corpus
- relies on input stemming from analyst interests and
assumptions, rather than on significant patterns that have come
from an objective analysis of the entire dataset
Fig. 7. SBD Claims analysis for SensePlace2.

addition timestamps are used to prevent old tweets from being
downloaded on subsequent queries to the API. Note that since
twitter assigns a unique ID to each retweet, any retweets are
stored as unique database entries.
The SensePlace2 Text Information Channel Backend is depicted
in Figure 8. Due to twitter call limitations, the crawler typically
sends approximately 150 keyword requests per hour. Once tweets
are loaded into the database, separate applications analyze tweets
for coordinates (depicting where tweets are from) and namedentities such as locations, organizations, persons, hashtags, URLs
etc (depicting what and where tweets are about). Next extracted
entities are written to separate location and entity tables. Lastly,
locations extracted are georeferenced using Geonames.
Approximately 1% of tweets include coordinates. While this is
a small proportion, it has gradually increased from less than 0.5%
in Nov. 2009. It is also likely that Twitter users will be willing to
turn location on during an crisis event and there is evidence that
efforts to develop crisis-specific hashtags can have an impact in
real events [35], and these hashtags include location. Thus, ‘from’
locations are likely to be more frequent in future crises.
The overall system architecture of the Twitter Information
channel storage and processing backend (Fig. 9) consists of a
central database that contains data tables, associated named entity
tables, location tables, and text search indices for each
information channel that support both the text processing tools
and the UI. The architecture is designed such that a wide variety
of information channels can be easily integrated and allow the

Fig. 8. SensePlace2 Text Information Channel Backend.

user interface/ processing software to quickly access and process
this information. Each channel of information that is currently
stored consists of four backend processing daemons:
1. Channel Search/ Data Load Daemon: Each channel has an
associated daemon that collects information of interest. For
example, the twitter channel search daemon currently uses a
table with queries passed on to the Twitter Search API. Results
are processed as described above. Each channel data table
typically contains a single text column of interest (in this case
the text within tweets returned from a search). This column
information is stored in the system information table as shown
in Figure 8 as it will be used by the text processing software.
2. Named Entity Extraction Daemon: The named entity extraction
daemon extracts the named-entities contained within the text
present for each channel and writes this information to the
associated named-entity tables in the database. Four broad
categories of named entities are extracted: people, locations,
organizations and others. The current daemon uses a custom
developed ANNIE named-entity extractor based on GATE [36].
The named-entity extraction daemon is a distributed application
that runs on multiple machines allowing a relatively large
volume of text to be processed in real time.
3. Geocoding Daemon: Named-entity extraction generates a
location table containing text information for locations within a
channel (e.g. “Haiti”). While this is suitable for text querying, it
is insufficient to perform spatial querying on this channel, e.g.,
to find the closest tweets to a location. The Geocoding daemon
processes the location table (for all channels) and geocodes
locations with coordinates of the best matching location
returned from the Geonames.org web service. These point
coordinates are stored and indexed within the location table
allowing for quick generation of heat maps and retrieval of
relevant tweets in a desired location neighborhood.

Fig. 9. Twitter info channel storage & processing backend.

187

4. Lucene Text Indexer Daemon: As discussed in #1, each channel
typically contains a single text column in the channel data table.
For example, for the twitter channel the data table contains one
column that stores all tweets that were extracted by the channel
search daemon. The Lucene text indexer daemon creates a
fielded text index for the channel text for full text querying as
well as for more advanced retrieval of relevant tweets within a
date range. The main fields are text, location, organization,
people and other entities; boosting of selected fields (e.g.,
location) is used to improve relevance ranks.
Fig. 10 and 11 show tweets loaded by the Twitter Channel Search
daemon and the corresponding entities extracted by the Named
Entity Extraction daemon (Locations and Organizations/ Types,
tools also extract persons). Fig. 12 shows the location table for the
Twitter channel and the spatial coordinates that were assigned to
the locations by the Geocoding daemon.
4.3
Tweet Entity Extraction Accuracy
To measure entity extraction, we first found a suitable query
“Haiti AND earthquake” and searched the database for tweets that
matched and had been processed by the entity extractor and
ordered them by date. The choice of this keyword was specifically
due to the fact that all tweets matching “Haiti AND earthquake”
will contain at least one location namely “Haiti” and will provide
a suitable experimental dataset for measuring entity extraction
accuracy. Output from the dates 2010-01-12 to 2010-02-18
matching this query is shown in Fig. 13.
A suitable date was then chosen such that the total tweet count
is manageable for hand verification. We chose the date 2010-0205, which corresponded to a total of 1074 tweets that had been
processed by the entity extractor; we extracted these for further
processing. Each tweet was then checked to confirm whether the
location ‘haiti’ was extracted. In addition, if other locations were
present they were marked as either correctly or incorrectly
extracted. Table 1 illustrates location extraction results.
The column ‘multiple locations only’ represents location
extraction results from tweets having multiple locations. The ‘all
locations’ column represents location extraction results from all
tweets having at least one location, i.e., all 1074 tweets. In each,
the sub-column column ‘all’ represents tweets where all locations
were correctly extracted. The column ‘partial’ represents the
tweets where at least one of the many locations was extracted. The
column ‘incorrect’ represents the tweets where at least one
location was incorrectly extracted.
Since retweets were included above, results may have been
biased as a result of correct or incorrect location extraction of a

Fig. 9. Example tweets, extracted locations, and types.

Fig. 10. Example Tweets, extracted organizations and types.

Fig. 11. Example Locations extracted from the Tweets and their
Geonames IDs and latitude, longitude coordinates.

188

Fig. 8. Time plot of tweets with Haiti AND earthquake.

tweet that has high retweets in the dataset. To overcome this
problem, the initial dataset was cleaned to remove tweets having
greater than 75% overlap. To achieve this, the Overlap Coefficient
was used [37]. The initial dataset containing 1074 tweets was
reduced to 627 tweets using string similarity. Table 2 illustrates
location extraction accuracy results on this smaller dataset.
Table 1. Location extraction results
‘Haiti’
% correct
Extracted
Correctly
Total

Extraction
92.2

Multiple Locations Only
All
74.4

Partial
21.1

Incorrect
0.04

All Locations
All
89.2

Partial Incorrect
4.4
1.3

992

166

47

1

958

47

14

1074

223

223

223

1074

1074

1074

Table 2. Location accuracy on cleaned dataset
‘Haiti’
Extraction
% correct
Extracted
Correctly
Total

5

91.4

Multiple Locations Only
All
Partial Incorrect

All

All Locations
Partial Incorrect

69.2

24.2

0.08

88.2

4.6

1.4

573

83

29

1

553

47

9

627

120

120

120

627

627

67

SENSEPLACE2 ILLUSTRATIVE USE-CASE

In this section, we present a brief second use-case. Together with
the demonstrated ability of SensePlace2 to support the design
scenario outlined above, this use-case provides evidence toward
validation of the place-time-theme approach to use of Twitter for
SA support. This use-case reports on our application of
SensePlace2 to understand the situation throughout the BP oil
spill in spring of 2010. The use-case illustrates additional tool
functionality added in response to practitioner survey input.
First, a query for “oil, slick” was used to begin investigating
concerns about the impact of oil being generated by the uncapped
BP well. Not surprisingly, initial concerns were focused on the
distance of the slick to various locations and the potential impact
on local economies. To obtain a more localized picture, the query
was restricted to tweets with coordinate location (enabling a
distinction between from and about locations matches the top
geospatial request in our survey). Several locations along the Gulf
Coast are highlighted using the Ctrl-click feature (Fig. 14). In
addition to identifying some localized concerns about impacts on
beaches, this result also highlights activities related to response
personnel; these include a job notice and a report about
hospitalization of clean-up crew members.
An additional kind of functionality called for by practitioners
was access to photos and video. While plans exist (see below) to
extend SensePlace2 to support processing of diverse information
sources, as a step toward that goal we added the ability for URLs
within tweets to be live links. The functionality has proved to be
very useful in enabling a user to quickly build a comprehensive
picture of an evolving situation.

As one example, we used SensePlace2 functionality to
understand implications of the spill for birds and bird habitat
(starting with the query “oil, birds”). One tweet link led to a FOX
news story, “Oil Spill’s Long Reach,” which included a video
with the lead scientist from the Exxon spill cleanup contending
that the BP oil would most likely be consumed by bacteria and
cause no real problems. This story was countered by a tweet
linked to a web site with many photos of birds covered in oil (by
an AP photographer) and another linked to a YouTube video
showing the oil close to shore off Pensacola, FL and others with
photos of oil on beaches there. These bits of information together
with the many tweets about oil position and impacts provided
context for a detailed story in the Natural Resources Defence
Council Staff Blog (also linked from a tweet) that detailed the
potential threat to breeding and migrating birds (Fig. 15). Overall,
broad-based SA related to impact of the oil spill on birds was
developed in approximately one hour of work. This brief use case
provides a second proof-of concept demonstration to complement
the success demonstrated above and in the accompanying video in
supporting the design scenario that guided SensePlace2
development.

among professionals in these domains to use social media as part
of SA activities as well as for other aspects of emergency/crisis
management. The initial version of SensePlace2 demonstrates the
potential of using a place-time-concept framework to support SA
in this domain. The scenario-based design approach applied to
development provides an efficient strategy to refine design and a
framework for subsequent user studies to inform ongoing design.
As noted in the introduction, SA support should not rely on
Twitter alone. One reason is that Twitter is biased toward age
ranges that overemphasize 25-54 year olds (http://tiny.cc/f948m).
For crisis management SA, the demographics of those reporting
events may be of less importance than when Twitter is analyzed
as a source of opinion (e.g., about political events). However,
even if user demographics are not critical, comprehensive SA
requires diverse information sources. Thus, SensePlace2 has been
designed to be extensible to ingest data from many other sources.
Planned next steps in the research (several of which respond
directly or indirectly to feedback in the survey reported above)
include addition of: (a) support for more kinds of social media
including text from blogs, RSS feeds, and tagged photos from
photo sharing sites, (b) a flexible mechanism to normalize tweet
frequency for the heatmap based on any gridded data layer that an
analyst considers appropriate, (c) a non-tag cloud method to
represent salient concepts extracted from tweets (our original
design included a tag cloud, but it was removed in response to
participant reactions), (d) a Storylines tool that enables analysts to
document and share fragments of information they consider
important to overall SA along with report generation tools for any
information synthesis they develop over time, and (e) cloud-based
core document processing capabilities to enable live streaming
and scaling to much larger data sets. For the latter, we have about
20 million tweets in our database currently but only 3 million for
2010 have been indexed so that queries are practical. We are now
in the process of migrating from data collection using the Search
API to a mix of data collection using both the Search and the
Streaming API. Specifically the Search API will be used for
seeding the system with past data while the Streaming API will be
used for collecting new data. A cloud-based implementation is
expected to allow real-time updates to the system so that it is
possible to support SA for events as they happen.

6

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Fig. 12. Query restricted to tweets with geo-location; several
coastal locations selected and tweets promoted in list.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH

We have reported on Phase-I of ongoing research to develop
geovisual analytics methods that leverage social media for
situational assessment in crisis management and related domains
where SA is a core activity. Results of our formal survey of
emergency management professionals indicate a clear openness

This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security under Award #: 2009-ST-061-CI0001. The views and
conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

Fig. 13. Highlighted location of first-hand knowledge of slick position reported in tweet with geo-location (left)
and results of following link on last tweet to story on bird impacts.

189

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]
[20]

190

A. Nelson, I. Sigal, and D. Zambrano, "Media, Information System
and
Communities:
Lessons
from
HAITI,"
InterNews,
Communications with Disaster Affected Communities, Knight
Foundation, Miami, FL Jan. 10, 2011.
S. Vieweg, A. Hughes, K. Starbird, and L. Palen, "Microblogging
during two natural hazards events: what twitter may contribute to
situational awareness," in Proc. of the 28th Inter. Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2010, pp. 1079-1088.
M. B. Rosson and J. M. Carroll, "Scenario-based design," in Chapter
53 in The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals,
Evolving Technologies and Emerging Applications, J. Jacko and A.
Sears, Eds.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002, pp. 1032-1050.
J. M. Carroll and M. B. Rosson, "Getting around the task-artifact
cycle: how to make claims and design by scenario," ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 10, pp. 181-212, 1992.
M. R. Endsley, "Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic
systems," Human Factors, vol. 37, pp. 32-64, 1995.
G. Klein, B. Moon, and R. R. Hoffman, "Making Sense of
Sensemaking 1: Alternative Perspectives," Intelligent Systems, IEEE,
vol. 21, pp. 70-73, 2006.
P. Pirolli and S. Card, "The Sensemaking Process and Leverage
Points for Analyst Technology as Identified Through Cognitive Task
Analysis," in 2005 Inter conf on intel. analysis McLean, VA, 2005.
F. L. Greitzer, A. Schur, M. Paget, and R. T. Guttromson, "A
sensemaking perspective on situation awareness in power grid
operations," in Power and Energy Society General Meeting Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century,
2008 IEEE, 2008, pp. 1-6.
D. Sinton, "The inherent structure of information as a constraint to
analysis," in Harvard Papers on Geographic Information Systems,
D. Dutton, Ed. Reading: Addison Wesley, 1978.
D. J. Peuquet, "Its About Time - a Conceptual-Framework for the
Representation of Temporal Dynamics in Geographic InformationSystems," Annals of the AAG, vol. 84, pp. 441-461, Sep 1994.
D. Peuquet, Representations of Space and Time. NY: Guilford, 2002.
N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and P. Gatalsky, "Exploratory spatiotemporal visualization: an analytical review," Journal of Visual
Languages & Computing, vol. 14, pp. 503-541, 2003/12 2003.
N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, Exploratory Analysis of Spatial
and Temporal Data: A Systematic Approach. Berlin: SpringerVerlag, 2005.
Y. Livnat, J. Agutter, S. Moon, and S. Foresti, "Visual Correlation
for Situational Awareness," in Proceedings, IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, Minneapolis, MN, 2005, pp. 95-102.
B. M. Tomaszewski, A. C. Robinson, C. Weaver, M. Stryker, and A.
M. MacEachren, "GeoVisual Analytics and Crisis Management," in
ISCRAM Conference, Delft, the Netherlands, 2007, pp. 173-179.
B. Tomaszewski, "Situation awareness and virtual globes:
Applications for disaster management," Computers & Geosciences,
vol. 37, pp. 86-92, 2011.
B. Tomaszewski, J. Blanford, K. Ross, S. Pezanowski, and A.
MacEachren, "Supporting geographically-aware web document
foraging and sensemaking," Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, vol. 35, pp. 192-207, 2011.
S. Kim, Y. Jang, A. Mellema, D. S. Ebert, and T. Collins, "Visual
Analytics on Mobile Devices for Emergency Response," in VAST
2007, Sacramento, CA, 2007, pp. 35-42.
J. Kohlhammer, T. May, and M. Hoffmann, "Visual Analytics for
the Strategic Decision Making Process," in GeoSpatial Visual
Analytics, 2009, pp. 299-310.
M. R. Endsley, "Theoretical underpinnings of situation awareness: A
critical review," in Situation awareness analysis and measurement,
M. R. Endsley and D. J. Garland, Eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 2000, pp. 3-32.

[21] A. Livinski and L. D. Passman, "Web 2.0 for Emergency Response:
Emerging Opportunities for Greater Situational Awareness," in
slides from presentation at: Annual Meeting of the Medical Library
Association (MLA), Washington, DC, 2010.
[22] T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo, "Earthquake shakes Twitter
users: real-time event detection by social sensors," in Proc. of the
19th Inter. Conference on World Wide Web, 2010, pp. 851-860.
[23] L. Palen, S. Vieweg, and K. M. Anderson, "Supporting “Everyday
Analysts” in Safety-and Time-Critical Situations," The Information
Society, vol. 27, pp. 52-62, 2011.
[24] A. Mills, R. Chen, J. Lee, and H. R. Rao, "Web 2.0 Emergency
Applications: How Useful can Twitter be for Emergency Response,"
Journal of Information Privacy & Security, vol. 5, pp. 3-26, 2009.
[25] A. L. Hughes and L. Palen, "Twitter adoption and use in mass
convergence and emergency events," International Journal of
Emergency Management, vol. 6, pp. 248-260, 2009.
[26] S. Sinnappan, C. Farrell, and E. Stewart, "Priceless Tweets! A Study
on Twitter Messages Posted During Crisis: Black Saturday," in 21st
Australasian Conference on Information Systems Twitter messages
posted during Black Saturday, Brisbane, 2010.
[27] O. Oh, M. Agrawal, and H. Rao, "Information control and terrorism:
Tracking the Mumbai terrorist attack through twitter," Information
Systems Frontiers, pp. 1-11, 2010.
[28] M. Zook, M. Graham, T. Shelton, and S. Gorman, "Volunteered
geographic information and crowdsourcing disaster relief: a case
study of the Haitian earthquake," World Medical & Health Policy,
vol. 2, p. Article 2, 2010.
[29] M. Dörk, D. Gruen, C. Williamson, and S. Carpendale, "A Visual
Backchannel for Large-Scale Events," IEEE Transaction on
Visualization & Computer Graphics, vol. 16, pp. 1129-1138 2010.
[30] D. Shamma, C. Santa Clara, L. Kennedy, and E. Churchill,
"Tweetgeist: Can the Twitter Timeline Reveal the Structure of
Broadcast Events?," in CSCW, 2010, Savannah, GA, 2010.
[31] N. Diakopoulos, M. Naaman, and F. Kivran-Swaine, "Diamonds in
the Rough: Social Media Visual Analytics for Journalistic Inquiry,"
in IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(IEEE VAST 2010), Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, 2010, pp. 115-122.
[32] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, M. Mladenov, M. Mock, and C. Pölitz,
"Discovering Bits of Place Histories from People's Activity Traces,"
in IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(IEEE VAST 2010), Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, 2010, pp. 59-66.
[33] N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, "Spatial generalisation and
aggregation of massive movement data," IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 17, pp. 205-219, 2011.
[34] K. Field and J. O'Brien, "Cartoblography: Experiments in Using and
Organising the Spatial Context of Micro-blogging," Transactions in
GIS, vol. 14, pp. 5-23, 2010.
[35] K. Starbird and L. Palen, "Tweak the Tweet: Leveraging
Microblogging Proliferation with a Prescriptive Grammar to Support
Citizen Reporting," in Proceedings of the 7th International ISCRAM
Conference (Short Paper), Seattle, WA, 2010.
[36] D. H. Cunningham, D. D. Maynard, D. K. Bontcheva, and M. V.
Tablan, "GATE: A Framework and Graphical Development
Environment for Robust NLP Tools and Applications," 2002.
[37] C. D. Manning, H. Schütze, and MITCogNet, Foundations of
statistical natural language processing Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1999.
i

SensePlace2 was introduced in a short paper that sketched the crisis
management motivation for the tools and described initial functionality for
a partial implementation of the query and filtering tools that are developed
and described more fully here. (MacEachren, A.M., Robinson, A.C.,
Jaiswal, A., Pezanowski, S., Savelyev, A., Blanford, J. and Mitra, P. in
press: Geo-Twitter Analytics: Applications in Crisis Management. 25th
International Cartographic Conference, Paris, France.)

