Interactive Data Analysis with nSpace2®
VAST 2011 Mini Challenge #3 Award: “Good Analysis & Support Debrief”
Casey M. Canfield* and David Sheffield

†

Oculus Info Inc.

ABSTRACT
nSpace2 is an innovative visual analytics tool that was the primary
platform used to search, evaluate, and organize the data in the
VAST 2011 Mini Challenge #3 dataset. nSpace2 is a web-based
tool that is designed to facilitate the back-and-forth flow of the
multiple steps of an analysis process, including search, data triage,
organization, sense-making, and reporting. This paper describes
how nSpace2 was used to assist every step of the analysis process
for this VAST challenge.
KEYWORDS: visual analytics, human information interaction,
analysis workflow, sense-making.
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces – Graphical User Interfaces (GUI); I.3.6
[Methodology and Techniques]: Interaction Techniques.
1

INTRODUCTION

making tasks. The Sandbox provides a visual alternative to paper
or text editors for analysis activities, and includes tools for
hypothesis creation and analysis, analysis of competing
hypotheses (ACH) [1], corroboration, grouping data, annotating
evidence, and prioritizing information [3].
2

ANALYSIS PROCESS WITH MINI-CHALLENGE #3 DATASET

The analytical process was iterative. It began with broad concepts
gathered from brainstorming in the Sandbox, and then focused on
specifics as data gathering, triage, and sense-making progressed.
2.1
Sandbox: Brainstorming and Template Creation
To begin, the analyst created a Sandbox to gather ideas and
develop a consistent framework for analysis. Since the challenge
focused on discovering potential terrorist threats, the analyst
developed a Sandbox structure that contained ideas for terror
methods, motives, targets, and suspects. The analyst also created a
timeline structure to chronologically organize gathered data. With
this infrastructure in place, the analyst started to gather data with
TRIST.

nSpace2 is an open-source and multi-source analysis application
designed to support multiple analytical tasks, styles, and
workflows within a web browser-based system. By combining
human information interaction, computational services, and
innovative visualization techniques, nSpace2 enhances the
analyst's ability to retrieve, comprehend, and organize large
amounts of data. The nSpace2 environment is a system-ofsystems that includes two main components: TRIST and the
Sandbox.
®

1.1
nSpace2 TRIST
The Rapid Information Scanning Tool, or TRIST, uses advanced
information retrieval and characterization methods to enable the
analyst to work with more information without increasing
cognitive load. TRIST provides query planning, rapid scanning of
results, and multiple linked dimensions for result characterization
and correlation. Analysts use TRIST to triage massive amounts of
data and extract information into the Sandbox marshalling
environment [2].

Figure 1. Timeline structure populated with evidence.

®

1.2
nSpace2 Sandbox
The Sandbox is the evidence-marshalling and sense-making
component of nSpace2. It is a flexible and expressive thinking
environment that supports both ad-hoc and formal analytical sense
* e-mail: ccanfield@oculusinfo.com
† e-mail: dsheffield@oculusinfo.com

2.2

Information Triage in TRIST

2.2.1
Preparing for Scanning
The analyst imported the corpus of news stories into TRIST, and
began queries against the corpus using the terrorism-related terms
gathered in the brainstorming Sandbox. The initial query was a
broad term designed to capture as many relevant results as
possible in a single pass. This allowed effective result
characterization and helped develop query terms for follow-up

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

327

searches. The analyst then created custom dimensions to contain
terrorism-related terms of interest.
2.2.2
Scanning with Multi-Dimensional Linked Views
TRIST supports the exploration of data in accordance with the
analyst’s line of thought. User-specific dimensions can be easily
created and used. For example, in the Terrorism Terminology
dimension, the analyst selected the “bomb” keyword,
automatically highlighting all results and all other keywords
contained in those results. By selecting “terror” and “group”
keywords, the analyst highlighted the results containing both of
those terms. This allowed the analyst to quickly find the most
relevant documents to the task.

timeline of events related to that group and a structure to facilitate
the analyst’s evaluation of the gathered evidence. The structure
provided potential motives, typical methods, and potential targets
of the group at a glance. The use of a common template for these
profiles made the analysis significantly more efficient. Each time
that the analysis cycle progressed from query to triage to
Sandbox, the various Sandboxes evolved as a model of the
analyst’s thought processes.
2.3.3
Managing Questions, Thoughts, and Hypotheses
The Sandbox allowed the analyst to develop and assess
meaningful hypotheses, represented by Assertions. As the process
developed, the analyst created and evaluated Assertions with the
available evidence. For example, the analyst suspected the
Paramurderers of Chaos as a biological attack threat. This became
the premise of the Assertion. To evaluate, the analyst used dragand-drop gestures to assign evidence to that Assertion. The
analyst then assigned a weight to each piece of evidence,
represented visually by a symbol next to the evidence. The
Assertion represented the combined weights with a bar graph that
displayed whether the net weighting of the evidence supported or
refuted the hypothesis. This ability of nSpace2 allowed the analyst
to approach the task more objectively, emphasizing evidence
gathered over cognitive bias. Using these tools, the analyst was
able to determine the most immediate threat as outlined in the
task.

Figure 2. TRIST provided rapid location of relevant articles.

2.2.3
Targeted Queries and Iterative Data Triage
The analyst then made subsequent targeted queries to delve into
topics of interest. For example, the analyst discovered a document
about terrorism expert “Jose Thom” in the first triage. That
document mentioned three other extremist groups by name, so the
analyst queried the corpus for those names to retrieve additional
results about those groups. The analyst also added the group
names to a custom dimension so that results containing those
names were highlighted when each name was selected.
2.3

Evidence Marshalling in the Sandbox

2.3.1
Saving and Organizing Data in the Sandbox
After triage of the query results, the analyst discovered relevant
types of information, including events, key people, terrorist
groups, etc. The analyst saved these pieces of information by
using the nSpace2 Pasteboard to move them to the Sandbox.
nSpace2 preserved the provenance of the data source as metadata
for each information piece.
The analyst moved data to the Sandbox in the form of snippets.
Small snippets of data were enough since the Sandbox supports
linking of fragments to full sources. nSpace2 does this
automatically when fragments are captured via the Pasteboard.
The analyst grouped data in the Sandbox according to the nature
of the information. All events deemed relevant were placed on a
master timeline.
2.3.2
Creating Group Profiles to Evaluate Threats
Over time, the analyst completed “dossier” Sandboxes for groups
that posed an apparent threat. Each profile contained both a

328

Figure 3. Evaluating evidence in an Assertion.

3

CONCLUSION

nSpace2 has proven to be a powerful system that allowed the
analyst to efficiently search, triage, organize, and make sense of
the large Mini-Challenge #3 dataset. The task presented by the
2011 VAST Mini-Challenge #3 was the ideal fit for nSpace2’s
array of capabilities, and demonstrates nSpace2’s ability to greatly
improve efficiency when analyzing massive amounts of data.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

Heuer, Richard J. Jr., Psychology of Intelligence Analysis, Central
Intelligence Agency: Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1999.
Jonker, D., Wright, W., Schroh, D., Proulx, P. and Cort, B.
Information Triage with TRIST, In Proceedings of. International
Conference on Intelligence Analysis, 2005.
Wright, W., Schroh, D., Proulx, P., Skaburskis, A., and Cort, B. The
Sandbox for Analysis – Concepts and Methods, paper accepted for
ACM CHI 2006.

