VisWeek Keynote Address
Visual Thinking in Discovery and Invention:
From Physics to Cognitive Social Science
Paul Thagard
University of Waterloo

Abstract

Bio

This talk will discuss the role of visual thinking in scientific discovery and technological invention. Visual thinking
uses picture-like representations as internal mental models
or as external depictions such as diagrams. The first part
of the talk will analyze the role of visual thinking in 100
great discoveries and 100 great inventions. The second part
will discuss the contribution of visual thinking to developing new theories in the social sciences based on advances in
cognitive science. Cognitive-affective mapping is a new technique for visualizing the role of emotion in social cognition.
EMPATHICA is a new graphical system for resolving conflicts by increasing empathy using cognitive-affective maps.

Paul Thagard is Professor of Philosophy, with cross appointment to Psychology and Computer Science, Director of
the Cognitive Science Program, and University Research
Chair at the University of Waterloo. He is a graduate of the
Universities of Saskatchewan, Cambridge, Toronto (Ph. D.
in philosophy) and Michigan (M.S. in computer science). He
is the author of Hot Thought: Mechanisms and Applications
of Emotional Cognition (MIT Press, 2006), Coherence in
Thought and Action (MIT Press, 2000), How Scientists
Explain Disease (Princeton University Press, 1999), Mind:
Introduction to Cognitive Science (MIT Press, 1996;
second edition, 2005), Conceptual Revolutions (Princeton
University Press, 1992), and Computational Philosophy
of Science (MIT Press, 1988); and co-author of Mental
Leaps: Analogy in Creative Thought (MIT Press, 1995) and
Induction: Processes of Inference, Learning, and Discovery
(MIT Press, 1986). He is also editor of Philosophy of
Psychology and Cognitive Science (Elsevier, 2007). The 2010
book, The Brain and the Meaning of Life, is available from
Princeton University Press, Amazon.com, Amazon.ca, etc. A
new book, The Cognitive Science of Science: Explanation,
Discovery, and Conceptual Change, will be published by
MIT Press in 2012. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of
Canada, the Cognitive Science Society, and the Association
for Psychological Science, and received a Canada Council
for the Arts Molson Prize.

xii

