2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Evaluating a Cube-Based User Interface for Exploring Music Collections

Arto Lehtiniemi

Jukka Holm

Nokia Research Center
Tampere, Finland
arto.lehtiniemi@nokia.com

Human-Centered Technology
Tampere University of Technology
Tampere, Finland
jukka.holm@tut.fi

Abstract—This paper studies the idea and feasibility of using a
cube metaphor as a graphical user interface for exploring large
music collections. In the implemented prototype, new music
recommendations and related information are generated on
the different faces of the cube based on the selected genre. In a
user study with 40 participants, the cube was seen as an
interesting and playful new concept that has great potential as
a user interface. The prototype was considered to be inspiring
and fun, and the participants appreciated to see extra
information related to the currently playing track/artist. In the
longer-term use, the prototype would have benefited from, e.g.,
text-based search functionality. Several other interesting ideas
for the future development of the concept were also received.

playlists from different genres is opened. In addition to
describing the prototype implementation, this paper
discusses the results of a user study with 40 participants and
suggests several ideas for further concept development.
II.

In the Grooveshark music recommendation system [1],
the UI has been divided into several views (e.g. community,
now playing, and my music), many of which contain several
tabs. A similar type of approach has also been used in the
mobile version of Spotify [14]. Different views are selected
by clicking on buttons located on the bottom of the screen,
and several views have further been divided into separate
tabs. For example, the search view consists of artist, album,
and track tabs.
In the academic literature, music collections and music
recommendation services have been visualized using, e.g.,
maps, connections, sliders, discs, trees, graphs, scatter plots,
and time series [7] [10]. In the following, we have briefly
summarized some selected applications that offer a broad
range of information and musical parameters to the user.
In [15], Torrens presents three different approaches (disc,
rectangle, and tree-map) for visualizing music collections.
Each visualization is able to present dimensions such as the
number of tracks from a certain musical genre, sub-genre or
artist, the release year of tracks, and a quantitative criterion
chosen by the user (e.g. playcount, rating, added date, or last
played date). As each visualization contains only one view,
the UI contains a great variety of information and may thus
be difficult to understand.
The same problem also applies to Pampalk & Goto’s
MusicRainbow [12], which arranges artists on a circular
rainbow in such way that similar artists are located close to
each other. By turning a Griffin Powermate knob, the user
can jump to different regions on the rainbow or explore
similar artists in the current region.
In the MusicSun from the same authors [13], the user
drags a seed artist name to the center of a sun. The rays are
labeled with words summarizing the search results. Also this
application uses a single view to show a lot of information.
In the case of Musicovery [11], the user is able to search
for music using parameters such as mood (dark, energetic,
calm, and positive), decade, and musical genre. The search
results are shown in a separate view with connections to
similar artists. etc.

Keywords-music; visualization; cube; playlist; music
recommendation; musical genre; user study; user experience

I.

INTRODUCTION

Streaming online music services such as Last.fm [8] and
Spotify [14] have become increasingly popular, and the
mobile versions of such services offer easy access to millions
of tracks anytime, anywhere, and often at no cost. Music
players typically represent collections as hierarchical lists,
where the music is arranged according to artist, album, song,
and genre names. One way to increase the expressive power
of such a user interface (UI) without using extra space is to
embed genre information in song, artist, and album text
strings e.g. using a certain font typeface [5] or color. Another
potential approach is to add small glyphs representing the
musical genre, tempo, and release year next to each song in a
playlist.
Modern music player applications may also include
additional information such as lists of related artists, artist
biographies, and the listening habits of user’s social network.
To show a large amount of information in an effective and
user-friendly way, such UIs are often based on several
different views or tabs. However, especially in the case of
smaller devices such as mobile phones, it can be difficult to
show all this information on the screen at the same time
unless the lists are kept very short or the UI is crammed up
with information.
In this paper, we propose to access music collections
using a 3D cube-based graphical user interface. In the
evaluated touch screen prototype, the main face of the cube
includes a playlist of music recommendations, and the cube
can also be rotated to access more information and functions.
By clicking outside of the cube, another view for selecting
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.39

RELATED RESEARCH

40

III.

PROTOTYPE

Our cube prototype was implemented as a Flash
application to enable the use of different platforms including
computers and mobile devices. As suitable mobile devices or
Apple iPad were not available at the time of implementing
the prototype, the main platform was an HP Pavilion tx2500
touch-screen laptop. The main design drivers for the
prototype were ease of use and easy access to a sufficient
number of music player features. Different UI elements were
designed in such a way that they could be operated with
fingers.
When the user starts the prototype, he/she first sees the
main face of the cube with the selected song playing (Figure
1). In addition to pressing the play/pause button, the user can
move in the playlist by pressing the forward and backward
buttons. Basic song related information (album cover art,
artist/album/track name, and progress of the song) is also
displayed on the cube.
The user is able to rotate the cube to any direction to
access more information. In addition to the currently selected
face of the cube, another face (in the case of Figure 1, the
playlist view) is partially shown on the screen.

Figure 2. The six faces of the cube. From top left: Now Playing, Playlist,
Artist Albums, Similar Artists, Artist Information, and Friends.

In addition to rotating the cube, the user is able to select
the musical genre from a “genre map” view. This map can be
accessed by clicking on the dimmed genre names located
outside the cube. When the user clicks on this area, the
currently visible cube is minimized and it animates back to
the view shown in Figure 3.
The genre map consists of numerous miniature cubes that
can be selected by clicking on the corresponding part of the
screen. The map is divided into seven different genres (blues,
heavy metal, hip-hop & rap, pop, rock, soul, and techno)
using genre names and a color-coding that was partially
based on [3]. When the user selects a miniature cube by
clicking it, the cube increases to its full size and the main
face of the cube (Figure 1) is shown.
Each miniature cube is mapped to a hand-picked seed
song representing the corresponding genre. The resulting
playlist is generated automatically on the server side using
the music recommendation algorithms presented in [4], and
the music is streamed from an updated version of Nokia
Research Center’s SuperMusic service [9].

Figure 1. Landing screen of the prototype including basic play controls
and the partially visible playlist face of the cube.

The six different faces of the cube include Now Playing
(landing screen), Playlist, Artist Albums, Similar Artists,
Artist Information, and Friends (Figure 2). The Playlist face
contains four songs with album art, artist names, and song
names. The Artist Albums face displays other albums from
the selected artist/track, and each album can be used to create
a new playlist.
As the name implies, the idea of the Similar Artists face
is to list some artists that are similar to the currently playing
one. However, this feature was not implemented to the
prototype, and the face was filled with some static artist
names. The Artist Information face displays the correct
album art and album name details, but the longer textual
description was also simulated.
The last face, Friends, simulates a situation where the
user already has some friends in the system. Several
imaginary friends are generated automatically and shown on
the screen. By clicking on the picture of friend, the user is
able to view a playlist from that friend and select it as his/her
current playlist.

Figure 3. Genre map view for selecting the desired cube.

IV.

RESEARCH METHOD

To study how well the prototype works in practice, we
arranged a qualitative and quantitative user study as a part of
a study on six novel music recommendation applications.

41

The user study had 40 participants. The initial research
questions for the cube prototype were formulated as:
• Are users interested in using a cube-based interface to
access music recommendation services and to generate
playlists? Do they consider the concept fun and
entertaining?
• Would the users be willing to replace their current music
player with this type of application? Or could it
complement traditional music players?
• How does the prototype work in general? How could it
be developed further?
• How does the user experience change after using the
prototype for a longer time?
The research method was a combination of observation,
semi-structured interview, questionnaires, and evaluations
done at home or any other preferred listening context. Each
interview session lasted for circa 30 minutes, and all
participants tested the software for the first time. The
participants were not informed about how the prototype
works or what they should do with it. Tutorials or help files
were not included.
The interview sessions were arranged in various locations
such as participants’ homes, authors’ homes, and the
premises of Nokia Research Center and Tampere University
of Technology. 37 of 40 interview sessions were arranged
using a HP Pavilion tx2500 touch-screen laptop and three
using a basic Dell Inspiron laptop. Evaluations at home were
performed using participants’ own computers.
In the beginning of the interview session, the participants
had to fill in a short background information questionnaire.
In addition to basic demographics (name, gender, year of
birth and education), there were questions related to
participants’ music listening habits, musical taste, experience
with music recommendation systems, and so on.
The participants were able to use the software freely for
5-15 minutes while being observed. After that, a short, semistructured interview studying both hedonic and pragmatic
aspects of the software was conducted. In the end, the
participants had to rate a couple of quality aspects of the
prototype using a seven-point Likert scale.
After the interview session, the participants were able to
use an online version of the software at home or other
preferred listening context for circa three weeks. In the end,
they had to evaluate the prototype using a same type of
questionnaire than during the interview.
The user study was conducted in Finnish. In the
following, all terms, questions and answers have been
translated from Finnish to English as closely as possible.

Figure 4. Age distribution of the participants.

All the participants were Finnish. 77% (31 participants)
were male and 23% (9) female. The eldest one was 55, the
youngest one 12, and the average age was 34.6. 63% were
university graduates, while the rest were split between all
types of education such as elementary school, college, and
university students.
8% of the participants were professional and 50% hobby
musicians. 50% considered listening to music as their hobby.
During listening, 20% of the participants did not usually do
anything else but concentrate on the music. All except two
participants listened to music at least once a day, and the
average time per day was 2.1 hours. The most popular genres
included pop (85% of the participants liked it), rock (80%),
metal (63%), soul, rnb & funk (60%), alternative & indie
(55%), blues (55%), electronica & dance (50%), and jazz
(50%). The least popular genre was gospel (5%).
43% of the participants searched actively for new music
to listen to. The most common sources included the Internet
(65%), friends (63%), magazines (33%), radio (33%), and
Spotify (20%). 88% of the participants had used YouTube
for listening to music, 51% had used Spotify [14], 32%
Last.fm, and 29% iTunes Genius.
V.

RESULTS

Based on the user study, we were able to answer our
initial research questions and received a broad range of ideas
for the future development of the concept. In this section, the
results are discussed in a detailed manner. Both interview
results and evaluations done at home are analyzed and
compared against each other.

A. Participants
The participants were selected using convenience
sampling from varying age groups (Figure 4) and education
levels. The only requirement was that the participants had to
listen to music every now and then. However, most
participants who volunteered to the study were active music
listeners.

A. Interview
In the beginning of the interview session, the participants
were able to use the prototype freely for 5-15 minutes while
being observed. After that, various quality aspects of the
prototype were studied by asking questions and filling in a
questionnaire.

42

1) First Impressions: The most popular first impression
was that the prototype was fun to use but also slightly
confusing. The cube was seen as an interesting and playful
new concept that has great potential as a user interface.
Some participants felt that the prototype reminded them of
Apple’s innovations. However, there were some interaction
problems when rotating the cube and some participants had
several miss-clicks while playing around with the cube. As
the selected cube did not indicate in any way to which genre
the content was associated to, the link between the cube and
the genre map view was seen as unclear. Still, 70% of the
participants were positive about the idea of using a cube as a
UI for music recommendation systems.
2) Quality Aspects: After the interview, the participants
had to rate several quality aspects of the software on a
seven-point Likert scale (1=totally disagree, 7=totally
agree.). Both hedonic (a.k.a. emotional and experiential) and
pragmatic (a.k.a. ergonomic, functional, and instrumental)
aspects were studied. In [2], Hassenzahl et al. have shown
that these can be independently perceived by the users. The
statements to be graded were:
•
”The program looked impressive”
•
”The program was fun to use”
•
”The program presented music in a novel way”
•
”I believe that the appeal of the program will last
and I will use it actively in the future”
•
”The program had an extensive set of wellimplemented features”
•
”The program was easy to use” and
•
“I was able to start the playback of desired music
quickly.”
In addition, the participants had to rate “My overall grade
for the program” using a seven-point scale.
Figure 5 illustrates the ratings given by the participants as
pairs of boxplots. The left plot of each pair represents ratings
given after the interview, and the right plot represents ratings
given after longer-term use. Numbers surrounding the outlier
circles refer to certain users in the SPSS data. In the
following, we concentrate only on the left side and leave the
right side for discussion in the “Longer-Term Use” section.
On the positive side, most participants considered the
program to be a novel way to present music collections
(median 6.0). The prototype was also seen to be relatively
fun and easy to use (both medians 5.0). When asked the
question “Did you understand how the prototype works?”
78% of the participants gave a positive answer. However,
25% of these participants did not fully understand the
operation of the genre map view.
The majority of participants felt that the prototype looked
good. For the statement “The program looked impressive”,
the median was 5.0 but there were also several neutral or
negative replies.
Only 53% of the participants thought that the prototype
had enough features implemented. For 65%, the lack of a
text-based search function was a major shortcoming. Still,
the median for the statement “The program had an extensive

set of well-implemented features” was on the positive side
(5.0). Except for the genre map view, 80% of the participants
felt that the features were easy to find.
The lack of a search function also had an effect on some
of the grades regarding the claim: “I was able to start the
playback of desired music quickly.” For this statement, the
median was 5.0 but there was quite a lot of scattering in the
results (mean 4.2, std. deviation 1.7).
65% of the participants felt that the prototype fit well to
their current music listening habits. However, only 48%
mentioned that they would like to use it for a longer time,
and as a result, the median for lasting appeal was only 4.0. In
addition to the lack of a search function, one important
reason for this was that the users encountered some technical
difficulties (e.g. network related problems) with the
prototype during the test sessions. This also had an effect on
the overall grades for the program (median 4.0).

Figure 5. Boxplots for the quality aspects of the prototype. Ratings given
at the end of the interview (boxplots on the left) and after longer-term use
(boxplots on the right).

In general, those participants who believed they will use
the prototype actively in the future also thought that the

43

Only 35% of the participants stated that they would like
to use the prototype for a longer time (cf. 48% after the
interview), and the median for lasting appeal decreased from
4.0 to 3.0. In addition to the lack of certain important
features, limited amount of genres, etc., another potential
reason for this was major and/or minor technical problems.
48% had some type of problems including program and
server crashes.
The longer-term results supported well the findings of the
interview. Participants who believed that they would use the
prototype actively in the future also thought that they found
the desired music quickly, that the program looked
impressive, was easy and fun to use, and that it had an
extensive set of well-implemented features. For all these
pairs, Spearman’s correlation was between 0.68 ≤ rho ≤ 0.89
at the p<0.001 level (2-tailed).
Only 35% of the participants felt that the prototype fits to
their current music listening habits. As the corresponding
number after the interview was 65%, the user experience
changed quite a lot in this respect. While only 10% thought
that they could use the prototype as their main music player
application, 48% answered that they could use it to
complement other players. 83% of the participants preferred
that the music comes from a music recommendation service
instead of their own music collection (cf. 68% after the
interview).

program looked impressive, was easy and fun to use, had an
extensive set of well-implemented features, and that they
found the desired music quickly. For all the pairs,
Spearman’s correlation was between 0.60 ≤ rho ≤ 0.79 at the
p<0.001 level (2-tailed).
Age, gender, or education level of the participants did not
have statistically significant effect on the measured quality
aspects.
3) Advantages of the Cube Approach: One of the
greatest advantages of the cube prototype was the ability to
map a great variety of data to the six faces. The participants
appreciated to see information related to the currently
playing track/artist and the ability to select other albums
from the artist.
Mapping the information to a cube enabled the
participants to see two different pages of information at the
same time. It was commented that rotating a cube would be a
faster and more intuitive way to display information than
using ordinary tabs. Due of the cube analogy, it was also
easier to understand “the bigger picture” of the UI.
B. Longer-term Use
The user study was arranged as a part of a study on six
novel music recommendation applications. The participants
were also able to use the online versions of five applications
at home (or other preferred place) for circa three weeks. On
average, the participants tested the cube prototype for 3-4
times during this evaluation period. When the evaluation
period was over, the participants had to rate the same
statements as during the interview and write some textual
comments on the prototype.
By comparing the different boxplot pairs in Figure 5, one
can notice that the medians for most of the statements did not
change much during the evaluation period. In the longerterm use, the prototype was still considered to be novel, easy
to use, and good-looking. In the case of the claim “The
program was fun to use”, there was more scattering in the
results, i.e., there were several participants who graded the
prototype worse after using it at home. Using the paired
samples t-test, it was found out that this difference was also
statistically significant (t(36)=2.928, p=0.006).
After the initial excitement, the prototype was considered
to be too simple and lack some important features (see
section “Ideas for Further Development”). This is well in line
with [6], where it was found out that “Overall, while early
experiences seemed to relate mostly to hedonic aspects of
product use, prolonged experiences became increasingly
more tied to aspects reflecting how the product becomes
meaningful in one’s life.” A major shortcoming to 78% of
the participants (cf. 65% after the interview) was the lack of
a text-based search function. As the prototype contained only
a limited number of genres, 50% of the participants felt that
the music collection did not meet their needs and 18%
mentioned that they did not use the prototype much for this
reason. As a result, the medians for “I was able to start the
playback of desired music quickly” and “The program had
an extensive set of well-implemented features” dropped from
5.0 to 4.0.

VI.

IDEAS FOR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

During the interview, we also received a broad range of
ideas for the future development of the concept. One of the
major shortcomings was the lack of search functionality,
which also had an effect on the overall user experience. The
ability to search for different artists and songs should be
added to the future versions to complement the music
recommendation algorithms. Other improvement suggestions
included enhancements to the cube interaction, usability
improvements, feature additions, and new concept ideas. In
the following, these ideas have been explained in more
detail.
A. Rotating the Cube
There was a lot to improve in the cube rotation
implementation. Many participants performed several missclicks while rotating the cube, activated functions from the
other faces of the cube, or launched the genre map view by
accident.
It was said that the cube could rotate freely instead of
using predefined and fixed positions. This would enable the
user to place the cube in such way that up to three faces
would be visible at the same time. Many users emphasized
the ability to monitor many types of information
simultaneously.
That said, the upper and lower faces (Related Artists and
Artist Information) of the cube did not lock to a fixed
position. Instead, the cube returned automatically to the
previous position when the user lifted his/her hand off the
cube. Based on the user study results, this approach should
be changed in such way that the cube could also be locked to
those positions.

44

As a potential future development, it was proposed that
the cube could contain more than six faces. When rotating
the cube, it could automatically generate more faces and
perform as a “magic cube” with a navigation map displayed
to the user. It was also mentioned that rotating the cube very
fast could update or modify the contents of the playlist.

could be a list of people who actively listen to music
recommended by that particular cube (~fans of the artists).
There could also be a possibility to see what other songs
those people listen to. The same type of ideology can be
applied to friends list as well; only those friends that listen to
the music offered by the cube should be displayed.

B. Selecting the Musical Genre
The greatest interaction problem with the prototype was
launching the genre map. Only 29% of the participants
noticed the dimmed genre names on the background screen
and activated it intentionally. In total, 68% of the participants
managed to activate the genre map, but the rest (39%) did it
by clicking accidentally off the cube and then realizing the
purpose of the background. It was said that the genre map
background should be more visible and additional visual
cues could be displayed. Several participants also proposed
that the whole prototype should start from the genre map
screen to make the interaction easier to understand.
Many participants did not understand that the small
squares in the genre map represented miniature cubes, and
they were just seen as squares that form the genre names. As
one potential solution to the problem, the miniature cubes
should be rendered in 3D as well. Also, there should have
been a clearer way to recognize individual miniature cubes
from the space and let the user know what kind of music
they contain. For example, coloring the cubes using the
selected genre-color mapping and providing additional
tooltip/pop-up type of information screen could have been
good solutions for this. In addition, those cubes that have
already been accessed should have been marked in some
way.
Some participants proposed that the genre map could
have been larger than the screen. In that case, the user would
be able to navigate in the genre space and zoom into
individual small cubes to view more details. The map could
include a time dimension, where the user could zoom in and
out to find newer or older music from the selected genre. In
the future, the genre map could also be dynamic and adapt to
the listening preferences of the user. For example, when the
user listens to a lot of rock music the portion of rock genre
could be increased in the map.

E. Enhancing the Cube
Several participants were interested in viewing their
listening history in the cube. There could also be a button
called “Never show me again” for deleting those cubes that
the user does not like.
One interesting proposal included manipulating two
cubes at a time. Data could be dragged easily from one cube
to another (e.g. songs from one playlist to another) or outside
the cube to delete it. This would enable easy and intuitive
manipulation of the cube content.
Cubes could have different themes matching certain
moods. For example, there could be artist specific cubes with
the artist picture on one face of the cube. Other possible
themes include kids, rainy day, holiday, music from the 70’s,
etc.
Some participants proposed replacing the current design
with softer shapes (e.g. cubes with rounded edges). It could
also be possible to unfold the cube to a 2D plate, where all of
the information could be visible at once.
While most of the participants felt that the cube was easy
to use, it was also proposed that the cube prototype should be
enhanced with tooltips and other visual cues when
performing the more advanced actions.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we studied the idea of using a cube as a
user interface to discover new music. In the implemented
software prototype, new music recommendations and related
information are generated on the faces of the cube based on
the selected genre. The main face of the cube includes a
playlist of music recommendations, and the cube can also be
rotated to access more information and functions.
The prototype was evaluated by 40 participants, and
many interesting ideas for the future development of the
concept were received. The idea of using a cube for music
exploration was considered to be inspiring and fun, and the
participants appreciated to see extra information related to
the currently playing track/artist.
The cube was seen as an interesting and playful new
concept that has great potential as a user interface. In the
mobile domain, the cube concept could save valuable space
from the user interface without compromising the usability
and ease-of-use the system.
Mapping the information to a cube enabled the users to
see two different pages of information at the same time. The
participants felt that rotating a cube would be a faster and
more intuitive way to display information than using
ordinary tabs. Due of the cube analogy, it was easier to
understand “the bigger picture” of the UI.
In the longer-term use, the prototype was slightly too simple
and it would have benefitted from, e.g., text-based search
functionality. Also, the users should have had more control

C. Playlists
Due to the space limitations of the screen, the current
implementation included only four songs per playlist.
However, many participants requested that the playlist
should be longer and a new playlist should be automatically
loaded at the end of a playlist. To enable longer playlists, the
content on the cube faces needs to be made scrollable.
Several participants stated that they would like to create
their own playlists by combining individual songs from
different cubes, or by smashing multiple cubes together to
form a gigantic playlist. Saving and sharing of newly created
cubes was also mentioned.
D. Friends
There were also some new concept ideas regarding the
Friends view of the cube. Instead of displaying friends, there

45

[6]

over the selected musical styles and the contents of the
playlists. Several other interesting ideas for the future
development of the concept were also received. For example,
the user could manipulate two cubes at a time, or cubes could
have different themes matching certain moods. Other key
ideas included adding a time dimension to enable the users to
find newer or older music from the selected genre, and
adapting the genre map to the listening preferences of the
user.

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[11]
[12]

Grooveshark, url: http://www.grooveshark.com.
M. Hassenzahl, A. Platz, M. Burmester, and K. Lehner, “Hedonic and
Ergonomic Quality Aspects Determine a Software’s Appeal,” Proc.
CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
ACM Press, April 2000, pp. 201-208.
J. Holm, A. Aaltonen, and H. Siirtola, ”Associating Colours with
Musical Genres,” Journal of New Music Research 38, vol.1, 2009,
pp. 87-100.
J. Holm and A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating an Avatar-Based User
Interface for Discovering New Music,” Proc. 9th International
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, ACM Press,
December 2010.
J. Holm, A. Aaltonen, and J. Seppänen, ”Associating Fonts with
Musical Genres,” Proc. 6th International Conference on Virtual
Reality, Computer Graphics, Visualization and Interaction, 2009.

[13]

[14]
[15]

46

E. Karapanos, M. Hassenzahl, and J-B. Martens, “User Experience
over Time,” Proc. CHI '08 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ACM Press, April 2008, pp. 3561-3566.
P. Lamere and J. Donaldson, “Visualizing Music,” url:
http://visualizingmusic.com
Last.FM, url: http://www.last.fm.
A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating SuperMusic: Streaming Context-Aware
Mobile Music Service,” Proc. International Conference on Advances
in Computer Entertainment Technology, ACM Press, December
2008, pp. 314-321.
A. Lillie, MusicBox: Navigating the Space of Your Music. M.Sc.
Thesis, MIT. 2008.
Musicovery, url: http://www.musicovery.com.
E. Pampalk and M. Goto, “MusicRainbow: A New User Interface to
Discover Artists Using Audio-Based Similarity and Web-Based
Labeling,” In Proc. 7th International Conference on Music
Information Retrieval, 2006.
E. Pampalk and M. Goto, “MusicSun: A New Approach to Artist
Recommendation,” Proc. 8th International Conference of Music
Information Retrieval, 2007.
Spotify, url: http://www.spotify.com.
M. Torrens, P. Hertzog and J-L. Arcos, “Visualizing and Exploring
Personal Music Libraries,” Proc. 5th International Conference on
Music Information Retrieval, 2004.

