2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Memory, Difference, and Information: Generative Architectures Latent to
Material & Perceptual Plasticity
Andrew P. Lucia1,2, Jenny E. Sabin1,2,4, Peter Lloyd Jones1,2,3,4
Sabin+Jones LabStudio1, School of Design2, School of Medicine3, Institute for Medicine and
Engineering4; University of Pennsylvania
{palucia@design.upenn.edu, js@jennysabin.com, jonespl@mail.med.upenn.edu}
Abstract

are raised in relation to how we conceive of (to design)
and construct (to build) the world about ourselves.
Furthermore, the research and design described was
conducted through a systemic approach to material
systems of which we are a part, thereby allowing its
applications to extend to other pertinent areas of inquiry.
Here, one such area is explored in the biological sciences
through the examination of cellular motility in relation to
its surrounding architecture or extracellular matrix
environment.
Education, technology and traditions of the trade,
frequently predispose architects and designers to approach
the world via descriptive and projective geometric
principles. There are, however, alternate mathematical
formal abstractions and representations to investigate
under the topics of materiality and affect. In setting aside
these geometric predispositions, how else might we
approach these issues from a design standpoint? We ask:
1.) Can a dynamic material system’s characteristics
be understood in terms of spatiotemporal order,
difference, and information rather than through
descriptive or projective geometric terms?
2.) To what extent do humans identify with an
object’s curvature or rates of change (or environmental
curvatures), over that object’s morphological symbolism?
In this regard, what are the underlying formal structural
diagrams residing beneath actual morphologies or
perceptions of morphologies? How could these diagrams
be represented and characterized in architectural design?
Taken as an architectural design inquiry, this
investigation is at the root of questions pertaining to how
we identify with material aggregations (i.e. their
relationship to us, and our perception and sensations of
them within our environments). While aspects of the
initial discussion which center on human perception could
revolve around several human sensorial systems, we

Stemming from ongoing research between
architecture and the biological sciences, this paper
explores dynamic organizations of matter in both a multidimensional, microscopic scale human cellular system
and a human-scaled perceptual environment from an
information theoretical framework. This research
examines latent virtual diagrams residing within real
dynamic material systems whose generative potential
emerges from difference, history, and ultimately the
structural information content of spatiotemporal data
arrays. Through the development of a design tool, we
offer a method for visualizing the underlying formal
structures of these data arrays. Currently this method is
being developed and deployed in the biomedical sciences
as a means of analyzing dynamic biological data sets for
purposes of determining unique spatiotemporal
behavioral signatures in different cell types within unique
cellular environments. From a design standpoint, a
parallel aim of this research deploys these same
information theoretical principles as an analytic
technique, specifically in areas of generative design,
materiality, and affect as they pertain to organizations of
data arrays generated from objects within their
environments with and without perceiving subjects, or
what we call relative observers.
Keywords: architectural models, information theory,
geometry, computational design, spatiotemporal order,
difference, memory, perception, material phenomena

1. Introduction
The work presented herein stems from an inquiry
rooted in architecture and design. The questions posed
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.54

379

direct our focus to the visual realm given the nature of
light-based data analyzed for our case studies; the
information that is said to arise from these examples is
generated from the advent of difference in light intensities
within multidimensional dynamic data arrays.
This paper explores the roles of difference, history,
and framing upon the information content inherent to data
arrays generated within dynamic micro cellular and macro
material systems; here, information is defined as a
function of temporal difference within a particular signal,
or set of signals, within a specific spatial neighborhood.
Considered from an information theoretical standpoint,
this paper ultimately underscores a fundamental shift
away from a description of environments in descriptive
and projective geometric terms to one based on
spatiotemporal order and disorder, and ultimately the
structural information content. Here, environmental
perception is a generative function of the variant or
invariant elements of a given data set which give rise to
the perception of material plasticity. Simply put, if one is
to perceive, there must be information generated between
an observer and their surrounding environment.
Furthermore, the current research offers a new method for
characterizing the underlying formal structure of these
multidimensional data arrays and the objects and material
environments of which they are borne, be it through
analyzing the pure difference or information generated
within.
This way of “seeing” difference suggests a
fundamental shift in the way we relate to objects within
our spatial environments. The detection or study of
objects is not undertaken in this research. Rather, our
work posits that all objects or entities arising out of
dynamic processes generate a continuum of constantly
fluctuating potential information arrays.
These
information arrays, or events of interest, are field-based
and favored over object-based analyses of systems. For
example, when moving through space the term “parallax”
is frequently used to describe the greater relative
displacement of objects in the foreground as opposed to
those in the background. This parallax depends upon a
geometric understanding of the world about us. However,
this paper does not presuppose a Cartesian 3-dimensional
world.
In other words, we do not constrain the
“geometry” of objects or environments by limiting them
through a description of their breadth, width and depth.
Rather, we focus upon the difference between and within
the objects and material in a given environment, which
give rise to multidimensional observational data about
that specific environment. These data would have greater
or lesser associated rates of change within particular

spatially structured neighborhoods. Thus, as it would still
hold true that the matter nearer to a person in motion
would generate a differenced data array with a
corresponding rate of change higher than matter farther
away, this suggests the information generated between an
observer and the environment is not a geometric problem,
but rather is one of structural information which is
therefore capable of being understood solely in terms of
spatiotemporal order and disorder.
Of primary importance to the research presented is
the difference arising within dynamic datasets. While the
merits of examining pure difference within data are
worthy in and of themselves, we have extended this
inquiry to probabilities of difference in the form of
information calculations for 2 reasons: 1.) By involving
the probability of change (information) within a dataset,
we are able to weight the likelihood of temporal events
for visualization and classification purposes, as is the case
in the biological data presented here, and 2.)
Psychologists and neuroscientists have demonstrated that
human perception arises ultimately through the generation
of information, not merely the difference, inherent in
perceptual datasets. As such, designers of environments
and perceptual phenomena might take into consideration
the instantaneous causal relationships inherent to the
generation of affects, and furthermore examine the
potential loci of their productions within environments
and material systems.
While the paper initially centers around 2 distinct
visually-based data mapping case studies relating to: 1.)
Behavioral signatures of biological systems, and 2.) The
human perceptions of moving through space, our
extended studies broach more fundamental questions
about the loci of information production within systems
and our relationship to them. We ask, “What are the
implications of information generated: 1.) Extrinsically to
a system [produced internally within a system and
observed autonomously], or 2.) Intrinsically within a
system?” Here, the ramifications of dynamic material
interactions upon a system’s information content are
considered from the standpoint of digital mechanisms,
though from two conceptually different framing
references:
1.) From a scientifically “objective”
standpoint of cellular behavior within a specific
microenvironment under a microscope, and 2.) A camera
tracked
through
a
hallway,
essentially
mimicking/recording how a human moves through a
specific space or environment (Figure 1).
Following our studies of the acquisition of biological
and perceptual data generated within these dynamic
systems in Sections 3 and 4, we introduce a method for

380

information quantifies the likeliness of events within a
signal. More specifically, this measurement is a function
of the probability of those unique events. As stated by
neuroscientist Kenneth Norwich,

visualizing the distribution of spatial intensities inherent
to both the pure difference and information generated
from these dynamic datasets and others (i.e. images of
paintings and an autonomous object) for comparison and
proof of principle in Sections 5 and 6. By further
examining neighborhoods surrounding discreet locations
within a given dataset, spatial intensities may be extracted
from their metric neighborhoods and remapped to a
vector space devoid of their “real” spatial
distributions/representations.
First, we present this
method in context of the perceptual datasets from our
initial case studies (Section 5), and then further extend
these concepts to autonomous objects and environments
thereby establishing intensity distribution signatures
based upon the rates of curvature intrinsic to the
objects/environments in question (Section 6). These
diagrams may then be further characterized in terms of
their organization or disorganization.

“Information theory provides a way of quantifying the
initial uncertainty and, therefore, quantifying the
information received. The uncertainty preceding the
occurrence of an event is usually termed entropy, so that
the quantity of information received is equal to the
reduction in entropy [1].”
Here, the more unlikely an event is to occur the more
information is said to be associated with that event’s
actual occurrence.

2.2. Spatial Perception, Art, and Information
As proposed by Norwich, human perception
ultimately arises through the production of information,
not merely the difference, inherent in perceptual datasets.
Given that architects and designers are interested in the
roles of materiality in the production of perceptual
phenomena, it is increasingly important to revisit this
discussion in the context of contemporary advancements
in digital architectural design and computation, permitting
us to consider the possibility and importance of the roles
of information and difference upon the perception of
environments and material systems. The following
section provides an introductory overview of a sampling
of the nuanced ideas surrounding information’s role in
perception and its usefulness in artistic debate (for a more
complete discussion, readers are strongly encouraged to
see the sources cited below). Of course, information’s
role in these arenas is not new nor are the references cited
herein. Therefore, this research should be viewed as a
revision of these ideas, which certainly deserves
consideration given advances in computational design and
an evolving architectural discourse which questions the
role of symbolic metaphor in favor of one which has the
capacity to position issues of memory and material
phenomena in a non-rhetorical manner.
Additionally, Norwich suggests, if one is to perceive,
information must be present with respect to an observer.
This sounds simple enough, but a signal and information
should not be confused, for uncertainty is a necessary
requisite for there to be information present within a
signal. Put another way, there must be difference within a
signal in order for it to contain information. From an
entropy-based approach to perception, Norwich states
“when our uncertainty vanishes…so do our perceptions

Figure 1: Extrinsic Framing (Case Study 1, left)
and Intrinsic Framing (Case Study 2, right) for
data acquisition. (Cellular images courtesy of
Peter
Lloyd
Jones
Lab,
University
of
Pennsylvania)

2. Background
2.1. Information Theory
Within our trans-disciplinary research, which spans
biological science and architectural design, information is
taken as a measure of non-linguistic content or the
communicative artifact of dynamic material systems. In
these terms information is the medium of communicative
exchange for relative observing bodies, be they organic or
inorganic. These bodies are said to be relative in that
each distinct observer possesses a unique memory or
history that has an impact on the instantaneous perception
about its environment.
Often termed “information
entropy,” this approach to the measurement of

381

[2].” This ultimately suggests that even in the presence of
a signal, the perception of the data within that signal is
only available through differentiation, either in the signal
itself or in the relation of an observer to that signal.
Compared to Norwich’s entropy-based theory of
perception, which is rooted in uncertainty and difference
within perceptual channels, psychologist James J. Gibson
developed a novel theory of perception based upon
ambient information arrays, specifically visual arrays of
disparity, which must have structure in order to be
perceived. Ultimately it is both Gibson’s and Norwich’s
insistence upon difference as a requisite factor of
information which merits discussion within this paper.
As Gibson states,

Disorder, Arnheim confronted the field of information
theory for its ambivalence towards spatial structure [6].
Our research, however, posits that such concern for metric
spatial structure can be accounted for if one takes into
consideration (and holds true) the spatial aspects of data
within an array of potential information. Arnheim may be
correct in originally considering this neglect from a
communication theoretic approach, but only because he
critiqued an approach which utilizes single sources of data
transfer (i.e. singular data arrays through communication
systems),
which
do
not
inherently
possess
multidimensional spatial attributes. Essentially, Arnheim
and Gibson failed to or chose not to take into
consideration the actual possibility of multiple, discrete,
spatially structured data arrays from an information
theoretical standpoint. Taken as our starting point, we
have generated and developed unique digital design tools
for the analysis of spatiotemporal information arrays
comprised of discrete signals that possess a unique spatial
structure.

“Only insofar as ambient light has structure does it
specify the environment. I mean by this that the light at
the point of observation has to be different in different
directions (or there have to be differences in different
directions) in order for it to contain any information. The
differences are principally differences of intensity [3].”

3. Methods for Establishing Difference and
the Generation of Information

In order to be perceived, these arrays must be
heterogeneous, or contain difference.
Specifically,
Gibson focuses on what aspects of these information
arrays remain variant or invariant under transformation
with respect to an observer [4]. It should be noted,
however, that Gibson strongly distinguishes his idea of
“information” from its use in information theory.
Gibson’s Ecological Approach to Visual Perception
posits an understanding whereby the world is “specified”
by information, and opposed an approach to information
as it existed in signal processing and communication
theory because he believed “the environment does not
communicate with the observers who inhabit it…The
concept of stimuli as signals to be interpreted implies
some such nonsense as a world-soul trying to get through
to us [5].”
More importantly, Gibson’s “direct
perception” of the external environment favors a view that
is not mediated through higher order man-made
constructs, such as symbols. If we set aside the notion of a
transcendental communicating world, however, there are
complementary ideas put forth by Norwich and Gibson
which suggests that perception can be approached as a
function of differenced arrays (signals) of data present to
our person.
Last but not least, our research also addresses another
issue surrounding the artistic merits of information theory
questioned by psychologist Rudolf Arnheim. Also taking
issue with signal processing and communication theory in
the essay Entropy and Art: an Essay on Order and

3.1. Difference
Dynamic processes are governed and marked by
difference, i.e. fluxes of matter and energy which are the
essential driving mechanisms governing the emergence of
events within physical systems. As an outcome or
byproduct of emergent events, potential information is
also generated as an artifact of the dynamic processes in
consideration. These emergent events create potential
perceptual stimuli possessing an uncertainty and which
we suggest are comparable to Gibson’s ambient
information arrays. Norwich has “termed an absolute
entropy or an uncertainty, as the potential of the
perceiving system to acquire information. Potential
information is transformed gradually into information as
the perceptual act proceeds [7].” At its inception, this
information is generated through difference within
dynamic spatiotemporal data arrays. Within the case
studies presented here difference in pixel brightness
(intensity) is considered to be generated in 2 ways: 1.)
External to an observing mechanism (video microscopy),
and 2.) As a function of an interacting observing
mechanism and its environment (i.e. video camera
moving through a hallway).
Case Study 1 is an account of observation by a
stationary mechanism (video microscopy) examining
distinct dynamic extracellular environments (Figure 1).

382

micro-scale, and 2.) From the acquisition of data about
the surface variation within a hallway by means of
movement through that environment at a macro-scale.
Both approaches rely upon a particular framing (extrinsic
or intrinsic) for differences to arise.
Until now, only differences within each system have
been considered. The production of information, however,
relies upon the history or memory of change that is
internal to the systems in question. As stated above, the
information of a system is reliant upon the uncertainty or
likelihood of an event’s occurrence. In our studies, we
consider an event-space to be each discrete pixel within
the spatial array of the viewing frame. To consider that
an event has occurred we merely ask “Has this pixel
changed?” To determine a probability of occurrence we
could have chosen a fixed a priori probability of change
for each pixel. However, we consider our systems to be
naïve, having no “knowledge” of their expected
behaviors. As such, they require their own history to be
queried in order to determine the probabilities of events
within (Figure 4).
The outcomes of these studies are represented in the
form of information maps that do not consider short term
memory and adaptation; rather they take into
consideration total histories of the systems. As such, we
disregard the ramifications of short-term, long-term, or
floating durations of probability in the particular
examples presented here.

Difference in this system’s associated data array is
generated solely within the dynamic cellular environment,
and captured externally by an observing mechanism
(video camera); difference is determined between discrete
pixel intensities across all time states within a video
(Figure 2).

Figure 2:
Case Study 2-Extrinsic Framing.
Contrast difference in consecutive cell images
under microscope (captured with video
microscopy). (Cellular images courtesy of Peter
Lloyd Jones Lab, University of Pennsylvania)
When one turns the data-capturing mechanism away
from a scientifically “objective” scenario, however, to one
in which an observer operates, a new set of issues arise as
to the “objectivity” or “subjectivity” of the data being
captured. Our second case study relies on the relative
difference generated between a non-stationary observer
and the environment within which the observer moves;
here, difference is neither solely a product of external or
internal references but exists simultaneously between the
two. In this example, the observing mechanism (video
camera) is tracked through a hallway in order to generate
difference in intensities for pixel arrays between time
frames (Figures 1 & 3).

4. Case Studies
4.1. A Note on Data Acquisition
The mappings presented in Case Studies 1 and 2
represent the cumulative information accrued over all
time states. Pixel intensities represent the moments of
what we consider the “common, moderate and rareevents” within the respective systems (Figures 5 & 7).
Events occur only within each discrete pixel across a
temporal array with spatial structures and coordinate
positions remaining constant. Though only discrete pixels
are taken into consideration temporally, the ordinal spatial
structure of the pixels is considered to be absolute and
unalterable, thus taking into consideration the likelihood
of events within discrete signals (individual pixel states
through time) and spatial structure of the overall pixel
arrays on each discrete picture frame. Given this pixelbased approach, the fidelity of spatial measurement of any
array in question will be governed by the resolution of the
associated pixel array, while temporal fidelity is taken to
be the duration between each captured frame (Figure 4).

Figure 3:
Case Study 2-Intrinsic Framing.
Contrast difference in consecutive images while
moving through hallway (captured with video
camera).

3.2. History/Memory
Thus far, difference has been understood in terms of
change within a system and an observer to/within that
system. As an example, we have implicated this change
to arise out of: 1.) Plastic morphologies between a
population of dynamic cells within a physically associated
and extremely plastic extracellular environment at a

383

Figure 4: Schematic diagram of Pixel Event Space, Difference, History, and Information.

4.2. Case Study I:
Biological Behaviors

Information Mapping of

We originally developed the Case Study 1 as a way
of detecting and measuring subtle, yet biologically
important, differences as to how identical human cell
types behave within different external environments, be it
a petri-dish or an artificially generated, self-assembling,
extracellular protein-based network of one type or
another. A major goal of this biological research was to
detect distinct spatiotemporal behavioral signatures
between cell types or their environments.
These
signatures will ultimately be used to produce non-invasive
tools designed to diagnose, prognosticate, and to
determine responses to new and existing therapeutics on a
patient-to-patient basis. Current means of capturing and
understanding behavioral differences in cell behavior
involves classifying individual cells as discrete objects
with each possessing a distinct boundary. These methods
of object detection, however, have inherent philosophical,
logical and technical limitations. Therefore, in order to
derive cell behavioral signatures, we do not rely upon
object detection, but rather employ a technique which
distinguishes regions of difference between 2 consecutive
images. This technique, known as “image difference
analysis,” relies upon the recognition of abstract change
over an entire data field, regardless of the objects
contained within (Figure 4).

Figure 5: Cumulative summation values for
information maps derived from the same video
that
demonstrate
weighted
“standard”
[(p)log2(p)] (left), “moderate” [log2(p)] (middle),
and “rare” [(1/p)log2(p)] (right) event occurrence
information for smooth muscle cells in the same
non-native environment.

Figure 6:
“Moderate” information maps for
smooth muscle cells in 2 unique environments,
native (left) and non-native (right).

384

Next, the information content is measured by
calculating the probability of difference events across a
data array through time. In this case, the primary
parameter is contrast variation in pixel brightness values
between temporally consecutive images of human
vascular smooth muscle cells within different
microenvironments over time (Figures 4, 5, 6, & 7).
Consequently, upon the advent of change within a
pixel array between two time points, the spatiotemporal
sequence of events (i.e. pixel brightness change) is
catalogued for further analysis. Already, as a measure of
total change through time, our preliminary studies have
succeeded in providing a means to distinguish statistically
significant differences in smooth muscle cell motility
within
the
different
interacting
extracellular
microenvironments. Similarly, the information mappings
of these same studies have further revealed distinct
spatiotemporal patterns of event probabilities arising from
these
different
and
physiologically
relevant
microenvironments (Figure 6).

environment. Such information maps and our
comprehension of the surroundings in which we exist and
interact are ultimately generated by the same concepts of
difference and history/memory. This dependence also
suggests uniqueness to an observer’s understanding of a
system (of which they are a part) based upon their
memory of and history within that system (Figure 7). In
other words, information generated from 2 distinct
observers traversing an identical environment will bear
similar, though different information signatures because
the generation of information is linked to the probability
of events that have occurred in the history of a system (for
a more complete discussion of perception and information
theory, please see Information, Sensation, and Perception
by Kenneth Norwich, 2003 [8]).

4.3. Case Study II: Information Mapping and
Spatial Perception

So far, we have considered a basis for establishing
the difference and ultimately the generation of
information inherent within dynamic multi-dimensional
data arrays. How would/could one further visualize the
underlying formal structures of these arrays removed
from their original metric neighborhoods or “real”
representations? We posit that production of such a
diagram would enable designers to study the affectual
attributes associated with a particular aggregation of
matter (i.e. environment or object) devoid of the burden
associated with their symbolic legacy.
The qualities of interest inherent in these information
mappings do contain an overall ordered structure, namely
in the form of adjacent intensities. Given a field of these
adjacencies, a macro pattern begins to emerge. At the
time that Arnheim presented his critique on information
theory and perception, the ability to take these macro
patterns and structures into consideration was absent or
lacking. By using a rigorous local and global approach to
the data acquisition and information calculations,
however, we have adequately addressed Arnheim’s
critiques, which were likely philosophically limited due to
technological constraints during his time [9]. Given this,
a method for the extraction of the structural qualities from
their metric space of representation is presented--a
transform which allows better understanding of the
relational qualities underlying the formal diagrams of
these data arrays.

5. Method for Developing Intensity
Distribution Signatures of Perceptual Data
5.1. Overview

Using the same techniques and tools outlined in Case
Study 1, Case Study 2 begins to speculate upon a
difference based approach to environmental sensorial data
acquisition, whereby difference is generated not solely as
a function of objects and environments external to an
observer but rather as a function of the intrinsic difference
between an observer and their environment.

Figure 7: “Moderate” (left), and “rare” (right)
event information maps for an observer through
a hallway.
Presented as end-state total information mappings,
the visualizations presented in Figure 7 do not mark a 1:1
correspondence between their production and our actual
perception of the selected environments. Nonetheless,
these mappings reveal insights to those data (potential
information) present in our environments that are capable
of giving rise to perceptions and sensations about that

385

Figure 10: Spatial intensity distribution signatures mapped to polar coordinate system for 3 paintings.
First, the intensity of each pixel (i,j) within an image is
compared to each of its surrounding neighbors. The
difference of each of these 8 values is scaled and assigned
a vector. Next, each of these 8 vectors is summed and this
sum is again normalized in order to determine a single
resultant vector representing the intensity difference of
each pixel (i,j) with its surrounding neighbors (Figure 9).
This new resultant vector describes how much and in
what dominant spatial direction pixel (i,j) is different
from its neighbors (Figure 9).

5.2. Method of Intensity Extraction and Mapping

Figure 8: Information content displayed as an
array of pixel brightness (left). Vector field
derived from intensity and direction of
information in pixel array (right).
In order to visualize the structural information
distribution signatures thus far generated, pixel intensity
is again considered to be the main parameter of interest.
While a histogram generating approach could have been
used to characterize the distributions of each pixel
intensity value throughout the image, such a limited
analysis would ultimately provide no useful knowledge
with respect to the spatial structures of the intensity
distribution in relationship to the given image as a whole
(dataset). Therefore, a method was developed whereby
the intensity at each discrete pixel is compared against its
nearest neighbors. This method does not inherently
measure information content per se, but rather the spatial
distribution of intensities across any given image.
Therefore, this method may be used to determine any
brightness intensity distributions within an image, be it an
information mapping or the difference in pixel intensities
across an actual image as are the cases presented in Figure

Figure 9: Difference in brightness between each
pixel (i, j) and its nearest neighbors (left) is
assigned an intensity vector, normalized, and
mapped to a polar coordinate system using the
resultant vector’s intensity and direction (right).
Next, each resultant vector within a given image’s
pixel space (Figure 8) is plotted to a unit polar coordinate
grid comprised of 360 radial divisions and 256 concentric
divisions (one for each possible pixel value given a 256
value working pixel space) (Figure 9). For visualization
and quantification purposes, each resultant vector is
assigned to its corresponding location in one of these 360
x 256 (direction & magnitude) divisions, defined as a
“bin,” within the polar coordinate grid.

10.

386

The number of resultant vectors falling within each
of these polar bins is summed. This sum is then assigned
a pixel brightness value between 1 and 256.
A demonstration of this method’s visualization
potential in Figure 10 illustrates the distribution mappings
of nearest neighbor difference vectors calculated for 3
paintings using the above method: Jackson Pollock’s
Number 1, (Lavender Mist); Piet Mondrian’s
Compostition A, 1923; and Sol Lewitt’s Arcs from Four
Corners.

6.2. Method of Intensity Mapping

Figure 11: Original object/environment under
question (left). Gaussian curvature analysis
(middle). Curvature intensities translated to
vectors using Gaussian values as magnitude
and surface normal as direction (right).

6. Method for Developing Intensity
Distribution Signatures for Autonomous
Objects and Environments

Much like the previous studies, whereby the amount
of change surrounding a discrete pixel is taken in its local
neighborhood, here the Gaussian curvature values are
taken at each (u,v) parameter upon a given surface. By
taking the Gaussian curvature values, external
observations are not inherently presumed nor is
determination of curvature projected upon the object or
environment in question. For the Gaussian value at each
(u,v) point in question, a vector is assigned whose
magnitude and direction are taken to be the Gaussian
curvature value and normal to the surface at that point
respectively (Figure 11; Note: the vector magnitudes in
Figure 11 are amplified for visualization purposes).

6.1. Overview
In the previous sections, information was a function
of the difference in data arrays arising from variant or
invariant data structures borne between an observer and
their environment. Complementary to that inquiry, this
methodology is extended to objects and environments
whose difference or change is internal to their makeup;
this method relies solely on autonomous internal rates of
change to local neighborhoods regardless of an implied
observational mechanism. Similar to the former method
of visualizing intensity distributions, the underlying
formal structure of objects and environments is examined
by way of extracting the rates of change (curvatures)
associated within local neighborhoods. This is not,
however, a description of that entity’s information
content, rather a classification of its underlying formal
attributes (i.e. how similar or dissimilar is the
object/environment to itself?). Whereas the method
presented in Section 5 is not a method for calculating
information but rather a method to visualize spatial
intensities in perceptual data, the method presented here is
similarly not a determinant of information but rather a
method for visualizing spatial intensities intrinsic to
objects and environments. Similar to the study in Section
5, this method would also produce a diagram that would
enable designers the ability to study the characteristic
curvatures inherent to morphologies devoid of the burden
associated with their symbolic legacy. Once extracted,
this type of abstract formal diagram of material
organization may subsequently be used as a productive
device enabling designers the ability to generate new, yet
familiar, objects and environments without necessarily
working through projective geometric means as a
description of shape.

Figure 12: Each curvature vector is normalized
and mapped to a spherical coordinate system
using the vector’s intensity and direction.
Similar to the previous studies, where distributions
are made about a polar coordinate system, here each new
resultant vector characterizing the intensity and direction
of curvature at each point about an actual surface is
mapped to a spherical coordinate system accordingly
(Figure 12). The point cloud represented in 2 views in
Figure 13 corresponds to the distribution of vectors
extracted from the (u,v) space about the deformed torus
shown in Figure 11. As the measured (u,v) density of the
actual environment in question approaches infinity, so too
does the density of the point data mapped to spherical
space, ultimately approximating a surface (Figure 13).

387

Conclusion and Discussion

only could these diagrams be harnessed as productive
devices for the production of new-yet-familiar material
organizations, they also offer an approach to discuss the
underlying similarities and differences inherent to the
formal make-up of such spatiotemporal material
aggregates while allowing the potential for a dialogue
beyond morphological symbolism.
This approach
necessitates considering the actual parameters at play in
the production of material organizations and affects by
examining the much larger implications of difference,
history, and information upon our perception of systemic
environments as we shift away from an object oriented
approach to the analysis, comprehension, and construction
of the world in which we are actively a part.

Should designers and architects limit themselves to
being merely actors in a world of objects external to their
persons, or is it possible to expand this perspective
towards a continuum of fluctuating entities (persistent and
non-persistent) whose identities are a product of our
relational difference with them? If we accept the latter,
this would suggest a fundamental shift in how we
conceive of and approach designing objects,
environments, and affects. The studies presented, rooted
in difference and information, serve to demonstrate a shift
in thinking from the construction and production of
objects and environments in solely descriptive and
projective geometric terms to one which places emphasis
upon thinking organizationally though time about the
aggregation of material systems and their phenomenal
affects. While descriptive and projective geometric
principles continue to serve the architecture community,
they are burdened by the remnants of an idealized
transcendental world. Furthermore, these geometric
principles and abstractions also offer an ex post facto
description and simplification of the world about us which
also requires a qualitative description to be ascribed to the
entities within that world. As an alternative, an approach
rooted in information production inherently suggests an
instantaneous perceptual construction of the world
through which we traverse. This latter direction also takes
into account the affectual attributes of the material
organizations with which we interact as participating
agents. While various approaches have been rhetorically
discussed within architectural design, this paper provides
a framework and rigorous methodology in support of a
discourse by which we may approach a set of design
problems surrounding actual material phenomena
removed from their symbolic inheritance. Furthermore,
the methods presented offer a means by which we may
study latent formal diagrams underlying the identity of
metric morphologies and affects of actual entities. Not

Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Alexandra Klinger, Christopher Lee,
Shawn M. Sweeney, & Mathieu Tamby.

References
[1] Norwich, Kenneth H. Information, Sensation, and
Perception. Originally published, San Diego, CA:
Academic Press. Published on the Internet by
Biopsychology.org, 9. 2003.
[2] Ibid. 13.
[3] Gibson, James J. The Ecological Approach to
Visual Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 51. 1986.
[4] Ibid. 13, 73-75, 89-91, 122-123, 310-311.
[5] Ibid. 62-63.
[6] Arnheim, Rudolf. Entropy and Art, an Essay on Disorder
and Order. Berkeley: University of California Press, 15-20.
1971.
[7] Norwich. 93. 2003.
[8] Norwich. 2003.
[9] Arnheim. 1971.

Figure 13: Vector data derived from a deformed torus and mapped to a spherical coordinate system
(left). Rapid prototyped (printed) sectional model of an approximated surface from vector data (right).

388

