2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Trust and Risk in Collaborative Environments
James Harty, Richard Laing,
Copenhagen School of Design & Technology, KEA, Copenhagen, Denmark; Scott Sutherland School of Architecture &
Built Environment, RGU, Aberdeen, UK

{jmh@kea.dk, r.laing@rgu.ac.uk}
Abstract

completed and reported. Integrity and ownership is not
challenged but everyone from planner to environmental
activist can access the data for whatever reason [6, 7, 8].

Many commentators and analysts are now saying
that we are reaching the tipping moment in the adoption
of building information modelling. By this they mean that
the uphill struggle for implementation is finally falling
into place and that it is beginning to gather its own
momentum. This is to be welcomed.
But the construction industry is very fragmented and
how implementation can be accomplished is appearing
sluggish. Certain drivers like owners and developers are
beginning to have an impact while others like architects
and planners remain somewhat listless.
How to manage this risk, engender trust and make
worthwhile collaboration can be helped with rated
'levels of detail' and calibrated 'metadata'.

2. Risk and its Assessment
Next with BuildingSMART it appeared that code
checking would lead the assault [9], but to date it has
only been implemented in Singapore with on-going trials
in Norway. Tests are showing that government
legislation, local planning controls and building
regulations can be assessed in circa twenty minutes for
specific types of permission and approval [10]. The only
variable not included is the political lobbying and
bargaining that can go on in mitigation circumstances.
But planners appear unprepared to consign large
municipal planning departments to the wayside.
As certainty came to the fore the merits of such a
process became more apparent. Showcase projects were
on time and to budget, which was virtually unheard of
under traditional methods of procurement. Client
demands therefore should be driving the implementation
of modelling [11]. This should be the mainstay of
adoption but word has not been as widespread as hoped,
with contracts in this current recession occasionally
reverting to traditional design-bid-build procedures [12,
13].
Vendors have also been slow to roll out compliant
standards like full Industry Foundation Classes (IFC's)
reading and writing, to adopt or offer better
standardisation to users. This would reduce the
implementation threshold that discourages acceptance
[14]. The lack of standards also works on another level
where not having compliant work necessitates vigilant
translation processes with undependable outcomes [15].
It is also appearing that the lack of open standards
clashes against a robust plateau where confidence could
be nurtured and developed [16].
Sustainability is being pushed globally and by
national legislatures meaning it is being implemented
across the board in the developed world and this will
ensure its uptake. Following the current recession, those
firms who can document sustainable solutions will gain a
clear advantage over more traditional operators [17].
With energy costs increasing and resources being finite,
global warming has forced policy makers to implement
targets and table deadlines to save the planet [18].

Keywords--- Trust, Risk, Collaboration & Metadata.

1. Introduction
Initially it appeared that architects would herald the
new process with the American Institute of Architects
(AIA) thoroughly scrutinising the possibilities while
proposing robust models of deployment [1]. But the
response was middling. Architects are reflective types
when designing [2] and boxing them into prescribed
methods of designing is not easy. A designer cannot and
possibly should not use contractual methods of
procurement and application during concept phases just
as there has to be development in the procedures by the
time production information is at hand [3, 4]. There has
to be a de facto acceptance of the data at each stage of
the procurement and a method of improving or altering
data if and when necessary. [5].
Practically speaking this can occur in two places,
either within the model using the model phase’s
properties, or in a viewer programme such as
Navisworks, Solibri or Tekla Viewer, which holds all the
diverse entities, allowing them to be overlapped,
collision tested or time line compared.
The former, permits objects to co-exist in time and
space without displacing each other, but allows the data
to be shared. This is a paradigm shift. Within the free
viewers many formats can be assimilated into the same
virtual time and space, allowing many operations to be
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.106

558

Assessment (LCA) is and will have a significant part to
play in the procurement of buildings [24]. This is even
more so, when the initial planning and post operations
and maintenance issues are added. Suffice to say that
best practice currently has three models running
concurrently, one for the strategic policy makers or
investors, one for the designers and procurers and finally
one for the operations and maintenance people who pick
up the pieces after practical completion. This is not
optimal or efficient at all, because repeated input of data
increases the likelihood of error, and encourages a
knowledge drop at each point of the saw tooth
knowledge acquirement diagram.
Better informed designs are possible, by bringing all
stakeholders on board sooner in the process than
previously. But while this is a bonus, it is also a
potentially problematic issue. Not least is how this
collaboration is managed. While there is clearly a need
for a manager, there is also a need for bells and whistles,
with regard to authorship, quality and level of detail, but
this could well be dealt with using metadata.
The benefits of the model are not lost on some
flexible entrepreneurs, already there are stakeholders
who are entering into mutual agreements to work
together to reap the rewards of completion on time and to
budget. The biggest issue here is risk and how much or
how well you trust your partner. Building trust in a
business environment and especially in a fragmented
market requires new skills and new procedures.
Changing work practices from the adversarial to the
collaborative, requires major changes in mindsets and
even social behaviours [25].
Methods of integrating these diverse methods will
improve how we make buildings and how we use them.
Facilities Management (FM) has a critical role to play
here and methods of facilitating designers without
alienating them will consume many resources before an
acceptable solution can be found. The driving force will
be collaboration and already we are beginning to see
consortia being formed where certain players can work
purposefully and profitably together to mutual gain [26].

Having a virtual model allows performance analysis and
climatic testing before deployment. Having quantifiable
data from a direct analysis tool gets results [19].
3. Benefits of Adoption
Finally contractors and developers are reaping the
rewards of modelling, because they can extract quantities
and assign resources. This together with control on site is
critical in leveraging the new mindset. The Association
of General Contractors (AGC) recommends to its
members not to bid on work that is not modelled and
recently building contracts are penalising subcontractors
who are not stakeholders in the model. This is done by
excluding them from the site until those who have
collaborated together have completed their work. A late
comer too has been contractors and more importantly
sub-contractors who now can see that a virtual model
allows for better control regarding both collisions and
time planning in the procurement process [20].
A follow on from the above is 'augmented reality'
where data can be superimposed on situations to give
better information in both time and place [21]. As
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) improve in their
accuracy the virtual model can be superimposed on to the
reality, meaning new projects can be assimilated on site
before execution and on-going work can be checked for
delays and/or improvements.
Augmented reality also means Bots (a form of
virtual robot) can mine information, and properly
filtered, provide it conveniently to qualified personnel or
place it in relevant data holders, all quietly in the
background [22]. Within the model this could be product
related where doors and windows are found to meet
client/designer requirements and demands.
For a designer this can be generic or it can be initial
prime cost sums. For the contractor it can compile a list
of all products that meet the performance criteria so that
when the product needs to be identified a qualified list
exists to aid procurement. Outside the model it might be
where utilities like water, electricity or gas can be
identified below grade or where neighbouring buildings
can be included to show context and terrain.

5. Trust

4. Collaboration

The major obstacle to collaboration is how trust is
nurtured, how new blood can enter the mix and finally
how information, competences and knowledge is shared
for the benefit of the team, the project and society at
large. Initially there were calls for sharing or giving
away data for free, but with contractual obligations and
recovery of costs there is a great reluctance to do so by
the players and those who have invested so much into the
project, to see others in the supply chain capitalise
handsomely on their endeavours [27].
How this can be remedied rests with the client and
the appointment of all the stakeholders in the project.
First principles say that work effort must be remunerated,
and secondly there cannot be subsequent adversarial
disputes about the quality and correctness of the data.

Parallel to this, financial viability is finding its way
into building information modelling where computed
area schedules are being mapped in early versions of the
model which can be maintained and updated through the
procurement of the project. Linking this to indexed price
books ensures better cost control and improves project
certainty. Facilities managers are also finding ways to
map their requirements into the model which is giving
life beyond procurement, making it possible to conduct
life cycle analyses [23].
The early massing can also be tested for sustainable
comparisons meaning that even at the early stages
various options can be tried and tested leading to better
informed designs. Similarly to sustainability, Life Cycle

559

'Fabrication' is where shop drawings and production
happen, where building parts are located, and
components and assemblies are known. There is a
committed price and specific manufacturing is in place.
Finally there is 'As Built' which is the actual building
with recorded costs and purchase documentation, where
the building has been commissioned and performance
can be measured.

The correctness of the data needs to be calibrated and
one method is metadata [28].
6. Metadata
Metadata is data about data. It is typically embedded
and is only of use to specific persons or things. This
might be the size and quality of an image. Its
dimensions, colour definition or the date it was created
and by whom, the date modified and by whom. From this
it can easily be seen that generally the interest is only in
the image but occasionally more is needed for whatever
reason, and especially when it is to be used by another
downstream in the process [29].
This too can be applied to modelling and
components of models so that the validity of any piece
can be verified [30]. This is the first step in trusting a
collaborator whether known or unknown. It is abstracted
information and can be seen or hidden until required. It
now makes the virtual element accountable for want of a
better word, and it marks or informs the end user whether
it is complete or just a holding-place for better informed
data. This allows the authorship to be tagged and any
information about amendments subsequently made or
commented upon to be archived within the element.

8. Management (the Technology)
The cultural change required to implement
integrated practice delivery is an enormous challenge
defining 'true partners and collaborators with a mutual
interest in a successful outcome'. Essentially it alters the
way and amount of time consumed in being adversarial
and in expecting litigation. Increasingly contracts are
explicitly saying that stakeholders will not sue each
other, that future legal action is a no-value task and that
trust with verification mechanisms will become standard,
as in banking. The principle cause of a bank failure is
often a loss of trust rather than insolvency, there is very
little difference between a failed bank and a healthy one,
Smith tells us.
How this impacts technology is principally in the
transfer of information and the risk it imposes on the
authoring party, who could be held responsible for the
quality, completeness and accuracy of the handed over
data. If a 'no fault' policy is in place each stakeholder
accepts the data as 'found' and must validate it,
appropriately to their needs. Validation consists of two
parts, determining if the data is from a trusted source and
confirming the integrity of the information itself. Smith
calls this stewardship [33]. Where there are errors or
omissions, methods will have to be effected to
compensate the corrector or rectifier instead of
identifying the responsible party or assigning blame. The
blame culture interrupts the process and causes delays.
There has to be a hand off of responsible control.
This greater dependence of stakeholders on each
other can cause strain within the working relationship if
trust is not present or more importantly earned [34, 35].
In order to minimise and in an endeavour to make the
process more transparent standards are invariably
required. This allows for a form of benchmarking and
acts as a quality management control for all those
involved. It covers the data richness, life cycle views,
roles or disciplines, business process, change
management, delivery method, timeliness response,
graphical information spatial compatibility, information
accuracy, and interoperability support. But it is only a
skeleton which can offer the stakeholders an index to
measure or check each other out, and to bolster their own
pitch by giving them the tools to build their own
argument and set out their own stall.

7. Level of Detail
The process of architectural design is the moving
from approximate information to more precise
information [31], But digital model elements tend to be
exact, whether or not intended. This can give false
indications about the precision of the data. Coupled with
its intended use, the author might not be qualified to
release or stand over the data in its present form. All this
needs a framework defining its precision and suitability,
and this is called a Model Precision Specification (MPS).
The framework is essential for two reasons; the first
'that phase outcomes, milestones and deliverables be
defined succinctly' so that team members 'understand the
level of detail at which they should be working, and what
decisions have (and have not) been finalized', and the
second; 'the idea of assigning tasks on a best person
basis, even when that differs from traditional role
allocations' [32]. This caveat is purely because
procurement is a process, and when the process is most
vulnerable is when it is most open.
Five levels are defined. The first is 'Conceptual'
where there is little geometric data, typically block
models, and only notional ideas about time and cost.
There can also be analysis about programme, strategies
and performance.
Next is 'Approximate Geometry' where generic
elements are shown, duration and cost estimates are
better informed, specific functions and requirements are
in place and the conceptual design is finished.
'Precise Geometry' as it suggests is a point where
quantities can be extracted, the building can get
approvals and permits issued and traditionally it can go
to tender.

9. Partnering (the Business)
A compendium of principles as an application
allows the stakeholders to value themselves, but value is

560

taken in good faith can have a detrimental effect on the
success of the project. If we accept that the first 20% of
the design decisions impact eighty per cent of the life
cycle costs then the bottom line has to be to accept and
moderate this situation [42, 43].
The International Facility Management Association
(IFMA) defines FM as 'a profession that encompasses
multiple disciplines to ensure functionality of the built
environment by integrating people, place, process and
technology'. They are seen in a secondary function as
supporting the core business.
Out of necessity FM adopts architectural floor plans
for viewing the built environment [44]. But with the
emergence of GIS scaling moves far beyond individual
buildings and site maps. Traditionally it focused on the
exterior environment and neither technologies ever
crossed. But Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) does
not have such boundaries, and this introduces the holistic
view that is now required [45].
GIS has now matured and is called a foundation
technology that seamlessly provides 'world-to-thewidget' scalability. This means that it can both drill down
to very small scale (from the larger geographic scale)
while also bringing layering of data into the matrix. On
the one hand it can tell you how many unoccupied
offices are within 500 meters of a parking space, or how
many employees will have to travel more than half an
hour to get to an office location, to the other extreme of
mapping a property by building, floor, room - all the way
down to the equipment and its usage in a Building
Information Spatial Data Model (BISDM). 'This spatial
data is the primary thread that holds together such
functions as project, space, maintenance, lease and
portfolio management,' Rich et al tells us.
In his critique of BIM he sees it as being an ever
enlarging file system, rather than a relational database,
and that it works in a multi-user/concurrent user
environment requiring highly specialised skills to
implement and use. This might be true but what he fails
to appreciate is that the entities created in BIM have the
ability to hold property fields and property values. These
properties can be blank (no value) and beyond the scope
of the design team or they can be imported and read-in
when making critical decisions.
These decisions might not be relevant or
comprehensible to the design team directly but the Bots,
mentioned earlier [46], might see fit to implement the
data in the decision making process for someone else in
the enterprise to use or act upon. The requirement of
appropriate tools and software is being negated currently
by the use of model viewers, which function similarly to
PDF files, where they can be authored or read-only,
depending on the need, meaning they are accessible to
all.

added to projects through people [36]. Therefore the
management of relationships becomes very important.
The construction industry is accepted as being
fragmented, rarely do the same people work together on
subsequent jobs and often they do not complete the
current job through either disruptions in the work phases
themselves or the sheer length of the project which sees
personnel either replaced or decanted to other projects.
Also the magnitude of small firms involved and the
whole culture of sub contracting out engenders a state of
flux and conversely a vested interest in protecting niches
and expertise in the market. This is a huge element of
risk in the construction industry.
But positive relationships do add value, improving
project performance and client satisfaction. They also as
mentioned induce less adversarial behaviour from the top
down, and offer procurement led measures for proactive
behavioural management throughout the enterprise.
Relationship contracting is best seen in partnering and
supply chain management.
One of the best examples is Terminal Five at
Heathrow, completed on time and to budget, which is
rare for a building of its size and complexity. T5 nurtured
and encouraged such an environment [37]. It was based
on the principles specified in the Constructing the Team
[38] and Rethinking Construction [39]. Had BAA
followed a traditional approach T5 would have ended up
opening 2 years late, costing 40% over budget with 6
fatalities; this was not an option for BAA [40].
Conversely Eurotunnel had difficulties in motivating
the suppliers once the contract had been awarded. Winch
calls this moral hazard [41] where the client is somewhat
unsure that the contractor will fully mobilise its
capabilities on the client's behalf, rather than in its own
interests or for some other client. The preferred option he
calls consummate performance instead of more likely
perfunctory performance.
The root to this situation can be found in the
negotiation of the contract, essentially between banks
and contractors. Here two cultures collide, on the one
hand; the banks prefer to move the contractor to a fixed
price which reduces their risk. On the other the
contractor works on the basis that the estimates have to
be low, to ensure that the project gets commissioned. 'In
banking you bid high and then trim your margin: in
contracting you bid low and then get your profits on the
variations' or as another said 'the project price... was put
together to convince the governments, it was a variable
price , a promoter's price. What it was not was a
contract price'.
10. Enlarging the Scope (Facility Management)
As if this was not enough to muddy the waters;
beyond procurement, lies both appropriateness and life
cycle assessment, -both of whom impact outcomes.
Operational maintenance and on-going developments
have an incredible bearing on how things are presented.
The lengthening and enlarging of the scope and the focus
and merit of the objective, mean that simple decisions

Conclusions
Just as in design-and-build or partnering,
collaborative consortia will go through a process of prequalification but not necessarily or singularly only

561

project driven. It will be for a longer haul and over or
through many projects. This pre-qualification will see the
various members of the consortium indexing themselves
with a view to both internally establishing their own
worth and externally finding a compatible niche or
setting the rate or level of engagement desired with the
other members.
Central to this process will be the expectations of the
collaboration and this will be built on faith and hope
[47], giving rise to confidence and resulting in trust. The
characteristics of trust were derived from the work of
Lyons and Mehta (1997) bringing the economic and
social analysis of trust to relationship management.
There are essentially two elements involved, the first is
the self interest part and the second is the socially
orientated part which demands certain obligations in a
social network of relationships. This introduces
reputation and advocacy into the mix and it is prolonged
through experience.
Already in the United States the National Building
Information Modeling Standard (NBIMS) of America
has deployed a compendium of principles called a
Capability Maturity Model (CMM) to facilitate this
process, but where the National Institute of Building
Sciences (NIBS) see problems is how to bring the
strategists and the operations and maintenance people on
board the grand coalition of consortia. Essentially there

are three pipelines and each has a different model and a
different purpose. But they all serve the same client and
there is a need now for the client to step up to the plate
and knock heads together.
Legislature has also a role to play here and as we
have seen with sustainability it can be done. Those
authorities with clout, like the major agencies in the
States such as the military or the state agencies in
Norway who actually commission work and have a
portfolio of properties to maintain are beginning to set
demands which require a broad response possible only
through consortia.
The strategic alliances made through these consortia
will see like minds using the same tools to use, reuse and
exchange data. There will be an acknowledgement of
each stakeholder's worth and expectations for each
stakeholder's input. The rewards will be significant and
in proportion to each stake. There will also be continuity
as the same methods and processes are honed and
improved with each project. It will transcend
procurement, involving the strategists and developers at
start-up, the procurement team through construction and
the facility managers through operations until
decommissioning and ultimately demolition.

References
[10]
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

FALLON, K.K., 2007. Letter from the chair newsletter
of the technology in practice knowledge community.
[online]
USA:
AIA.
Available
from:
http://info.aia.org/nwsltr_tap.cfm?pagename=tap_a_0704
_chair [Accessed 4/9/2011 2011]
SCHÖN, D., 1987. Educating the Reflective Practitioner:
Toward a New Design for Teaching and Learning in the
Professions. Proquest Info & Learning.
COOMBE, M., 2011. Conceptual BIM Building
Information Modelling for Concept Design. Denmark:
Copenhagen School of Design & Technology.
KOROLUK, K., 2009. BIM sure to bring creative
disruption. [online] USA: Daily Commercial News.
Available
from:
http://www.refworks.com/rwbookmark/bookmarklanding
.asp [Accessed 4/9/2011 2011]
MILLER, G.H. et al., 2008. On Compensation
Considerations for Teams in a Changing Industry. USA:
AIA.
HARDIN, B., 2009. BIM and Construction Management
HARDIN, B., 2008. REVIT - for real: It starts...
interoperability and singular modeling. [online]
Available
from:
http://bimcompletethought.blogspot.com/2008/11/itstarts.html [Accessed 27/11/2008 2008]
HARTY, J. and LAING, R., 2010. Handbook of
Research on Building Information Modeling and
Construction Informatics: Concepts and Technologies.
In: J. UNDERWOOD and U. ISIKDAG, eds. First ed.
Hersey, New York, USA: Information Science Reference
(an imprint of IGI Global). pp. 546-560
CONOVER, D., 2008b. Smartcodes part-3. [online] ICC.
Available
from:

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]

562

http://media.iccsafe.org/news/misc/smart_codes/smartco
des_part-3.html [Accessed 05/04/2008 2008]
ROOTH, Ø., 2010. Public clients and buildingSMART
Key issues in building policy. Keynote address ed.
Copenhagen:
FONG, S., 2007. One Island East, Hong Kong Swire
Properties. Exhibition ed. Copenhagen:
ERKESSOUSI, N.E., 2010. How Integrated Project
Delivery is an Advantage to the Danish Building
Industry, and how it can be executed. Unpublished
Bachelor of Architectural Technology & Construction
Management thesis, Copenhagen School of Design &
Technology.
BANDUREVSKAJA,
I.,
2010.
Meaningful
Management. Unpublished Bachelor of Architectural
Technology & Construction Management thesis,
Copenhagen School of Design and Technology.
PAZLAR, T. and TURK, Z., 2008. Interoperability in
practice: Geometric data exchange using the IFC
standard. Electronic Journal of Information Technology
in Construction, 13, pp. 362-380
SMITH, D.K., 2010. BuildingSmart in the USA.
University Lecture ed. Copenhagen:
SMYTH, H. and PRYKE, S., 2008. Collaborative
Relationships in Construction developing frameworks &
networks. London: Wiley Blackwell.
SMITH, D.K., 2011. International Standards. 6 April
2011. Bimbyen.
ANDERSEN, M., 2009. The world reflects on
Copenhagen process. [online] The Official Website of
Denmark.
Available
from:
http://www.denmark.dk/en/menu/ClimateEnergy/COP15-Copenhagen-2009/Selected-COP15news/The-world-reflects-on-Copenhagen-process.htm
[Accessed 9/19/2010 2010]

[19] HARDIN, B., 2009. BIM and Construction Management
Proven Tools, Methods and Workflows. Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA: Wiley Publishing.
[20] YOUNG, N.W.J. et al., 2009. SmartMarket Report on
The Business Value of BIM Getting Building
Information Modeling to the Bottom Line. McGraw Hill
Construction.
[21] BRAUN, A.K., 2010. Bips konference med internationalt
snit | BIMbyen.dk CoSPACES; augmented reality.
[online] Nyborg, Denmark: BIM Byen. Available from:
http://www.bimbyen.dk/news/bips-konference-medinternationalt-snit [Accessed 9/19/2010 2010]
[22] OBONYO,
E.,
2010.
TOWARDS
AGENTAUGMENTED ONTOLOGIES FOR EDUCATIONAL
VDC APPLICATIONS. Journal of Information
Technology in Construction, 15, pp. 318
[23] HARTY, J. and LAING, R., 2010. Handbook of
Research on Building Information Modeling and
Construction Informatics: Concepts and Technologies.
In: J. UNDERWOOD and U. ISIKDAG, eds. First ed.
Hersey, New York, USA: Information Science Reference
(an imprint of IGI Global). pp. 546-560
[24] SØRENSEN, T. , 2010. Focus Group discussion on role
of FM in BIM.
[25] SIGURÐSSON, S.A., 2009. BENEFITS OF BUILDING
INFORMATION MODELING. Bachelor of architectural
Technology and Construction Management ed.
Copenhagen:
[26] SMYTH, H. and PRYKE, S., 2006. The Management of
Complex Projects a relationship approach.
[27] WILLIAMS, C., 2009. Lawyers scared of computers.
[online]
The
Register.
Available
from:
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/12/23/cps_paper/
[Accessed 12/24/2009 2009]
[28] ONUMA, K.G., 2010. Location, Location, Location BIM, BIM, BIM. 2010, Fall 2010
[29] BEDRICK, J., 2008. Organizing the development of a
building information model. [online] AEC Bytes.
Available
from:
http://www.aecbytes.com/feature/2008/MPSforBIM.html
[Accessed 26 April 2011]
[30] BARRETT, P., 2008. Revaluing Construction. First ed.
UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
[31] CONOVER, D., 2008a. Smartcodes part-2. [online] ICC.
Available
from:
http://media.iccsafe.org/news/misc/smart_codes/smartco
des_part-2.html [Accessed 05/04/2008 2008]
[32] ECKBLAD, S., RUBEL, Z. and BEDRICK, J., 2007.
Integrated Project Delivery What, Why and How. 2nd
May 2007. AIA.
[33] SMYTH, H. and PRYKE, S., 2006. The Management of
Complex Projects a relationship approach.
[34] POTTS, K., 2006. Project management and the changing
nature of the quantity surveying profession – Heathrow
Terminal 5 case study.
[35] HASTE, N., 2002. Terminal Five Agreement; The
Delivery Team Handbook (without PEP). Supply Chain
Handbook ed. London:
[36] SMYTH, H. and PRYKE, S., 2008. Collaborative
Relationships in Construction
[37] FERROUSSAT, D., 2008. The Terminal 5 Project Heathrow. UK: BAA Heathrow.
[38] LATHAM, M., 1994. Constructing the Team The Final
Report of the Government/Industry Review of

[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]
[46]

[47]

563

Procurement and Contractual Arrangements in the UK
Construction Industry. HMSO.
EGAN, J., 1998. Rethinking Construction The report of
the Construction Task Force. UK:
POTTS, K., 2006. Project management and the changing
nature of the quantity surveying profession – Heathrow
Terminal 5 case study.
WINCH, G., 2002. Managing Construction Projects: an
information processing approach. Oxford: Blackwell
Science.
SMITH, D.K. and TARDIF, M., 2009. Building
Information Modeling A Strategic Implementation Guide
for Architects, Engineers, Constructors and Real Estate
Asset Managers. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley &
Sons Inc.
SAPP,
D.,
2010.
Computerized
maintenance
management systems (CMMS) | whole building design
guide. [online] Plexus Scientific. Available from:
http://www.wbdg.org/om/cmms.php
[Accessed
3/11/2010 2010]
RICH, S. and DAVIS, K.H., 2010. Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) for Facility Management.
USA: IFMA Foundation.
WIKIPEDIA CONTRIBUTORS, b. Logistics [online]
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 2010]
OBONYO,
E.,
2010.
TOWARDS
AGENTAUGMENTED ONTOLOGIES FOR EDUCATIONAL
VDC APPLICATIONS. Journal of Information
Technology in Construction, 15, pp. 318
SMYTH, H. and PRYKE, S., 2006. The Management of
Complex Projects a relationship approach.

