2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Brief History of Computer Art and New Media Art in Latvia

6ROYLWD =DULƼD
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Latvia
Riga, Latvia
solvita.zarina@lumii.lv

Abstract—The Soviet and particularly Latvian computer art is
not a well-known topic of digital art history. This paper
attempts to analyze this computer art in context of the 20th
century art, considering the political circumstances in Soviet
Union. At the turn of the 21st century after gaining the
independence new media art examples and collaboration
between scientists, computer scientists, software programmers
and the artists are to be found in Latvia. Some recent media
art events are mentioned from this viewpoint.

II.

The first visual examples created by using an analogue
computer appear in the mid-1950s in the United States and
Germany. Some experiments with oscilloscope images are
to be found even before the stage of electronic graphics. The
point of interest, taking into account the Soviet art
background, is why anybody dares to call these pieces art.
We can prove it from the viewpoint of the 20th century
Western art history. The art forms, such as cubism, Dada,
futurism,
naïve
art,
primitivism,
constructivism,
suprematism and kinetic art had emerged and were widely
considered to be art forms at that time. Abstract
expressionism was one of the major stylistic approaches in
the US during the 1950s. Therefore, three things
characteristic of the first examples of computer art:
x art as a process not only as a result (Dada),
x non-professional artists (naïve and primitive art),
x abstract, non-representative art forms (such as
suprematism, constructivism, abstractionism)
have already been accepted by art theoreticians, gallery and
museum curators, as well as by general public in the
Western world. [1]
The first authors of the computer images are
mathematicians, computer scientists and engineers. It seems
to be self-understandable considering the availability of at
that time extremely expensive computer resources and
necessity for high level technical skills. They boldly
developed their artistic careers, participated in the
exhibitions, and broadened their academic experience by
developing courses about computer art and aesthetics.
Herbert W. Franke (1927) and ‘Three big N’ - A. Michael
Noll (1939), Frieder Nake (1938) and Georg Nees (1926)
can be mentioned as good examples of this highly skilled
society of scientists and other well furnished minds.
It has to be remarked that they had their own theoretical
viewpoint on the style and aesthetics of the newly created
art form. Roger F. Malina (1912 - 1981) even was a creator
and the first editor of the journal Leonardo. This medium
was started as an international peer-reviewed research
journal that featured articles written by artists on their
creative work, and focused on the display of the interactions
between the contemporary arts with the sciences and new

Keywords-computer graphics; computer art; digital art;
ASCII art; new media art

I.

INTRODUCTION

Latvia, a small state of the Baltic region, was
incorporated into the Soviet Union after the Second World
War. The whole art process during the period 1945 – 1991
to a certain degree was affected by this political fact.
Computer art in Latvia developed differently as it happened
in the US, Western Europe and Japan.
The emergence of computer graphics and early computer
art in Latvia as well as elsewhere completely depended on
availability of the computer technique here. Since the
moment when the graphical output devices became
available (in Latvian case – so called – “the wide print”)
some people started to use them for experiments in image
making. These first computer drawings were as realistic as
possible. After regaining of independence in the early 1990s
the Soviet-style art became extremely unpopular, but now
this period in Latvian art history of in the 20th century is
going to be reassured. This early computer art in context of
its visual form seems to be original and even weird from the
viewpoint of Western digital art history. Some disparities of
what is considered to be art in perception of common
audience at that time in Soviet Latvia should be mentioned.
Since the mid-1990s the Internet possibilities became
available for the artists worldwide. Some informal artist
communities (E-Lab) and new media festivals (ART +
COMMUNICATION) emerged. During the next fifteen
years new media art gained popularity among the artists and
now it is to be considered in the mainstream of Latvia’s
visual culture.

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.25

COMPUTER ART DEVELOPMENT FROM THE MID-20TH
CENTURY

457

describing these movements by a system of differential
equations.

technologies [2]. Leonardo remains a significant medium
till nowadays and it is covered by Arts & Humanities
Citation Index and Current Contents/Arts & Humanities of
Thomson Reuters.
Herbert W. Franke states: “Art can be regarded as a
special form of communication. It is the task of the artist to
provide a message, which in this particular case is also
subject to certain aesthetic considerations, however they
may be defined. Formerly, colours, sounds and tones were
regarded as the raw material of art; today they would be
considered information carriers. The elements of art are
data, i.e. immaterial components. Even though this
statement may sound rather sober, it does imply that art is
not a material but rather an intellectual process” [3].
Almost ten years later the informal communities
consisting of professional artists (visual artists, as well as
musicians, filmmakers, etc.) of the one part and scientists,
engineers of the other part began to spread out in order to
combine the creative potential of art with computer
technologies. The foundation of non-profit organization
Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.) in New York
and its later activities (1967 - ca. 1989) is a well-known
example.
III.

Figure 1. A still from animation film Koshechka.

The papers covering the topics of computer aesthetics
and computer music appeared in the Soviet Union,
particularly in Soviet Russia starting from the 1970s.

BEGINNINGS OF COMPUTER ART IN THE SOVIET
UNION

The emergence of computer art was tightly connected
with the computer industry development in the Soviet
Union. The first Soviet project of an electric programmable
computer was started in 1948 by S. A. Lebedev in Kiev. In
1951 both this project and a competing project by I. S.
Brook were completed. The famous gap in computation
possibilities between the West and the Soviet block then
was much smaller than at a later time but graphical output
devices appeared later and in essentially lesser quantities.
This, of course, influenced the development of computer art
in the Soviet Union. Experimentation with computer art at
that period was done only in centres were computers were
constructed. It was half impossible to buy even the Soviet
technique, and the imported machinery was a very rear
phenomenon.
Already in 1964 Yu. M. Bayakovsky and T. A.
Shuskevich created a visualisation demo of the process of
plasma flow around a cylinder. In 1967 the Institute of
Applied Mathematics, Academy of Sciences, USSR
obtained a foreign made graph plotter CalCamp. This
started a series of short animation movies. The frame
sequence was done by printing out every computer made
still, photographing it and then putting together. G. K.
Borovin, I. I. Karpov and N. N. Kozlov, et al. participated in
this project. In 1968 the animation film “Koshechka” (Little
Cat) made by a team led by N. N. Konstantinov achieved
the popularity.
It was created on the Soviet 2nd generation computer
BESM-4. It boasted with the realistic movement
performance of a living creature. This was achieved by

IV.

ASCII ART IN SOVIET LATVIA

In the former Soviet Latvia the first generation
computer was constructHG E\ D WHDP OHDG E\ -ƗQLV 'DXEH LQ
1962. Some graphics features became available at the end of
the 1960s. In 1969 a second generation computer GE-415
was bought from France to set it at the premises of the
Computing Centre in Riga. This was the first machine with
an output device printing more than twenty symbols in one
line. Engineers called it “the wide print”.
During the Cold War no connections with the Western
modern art were officially allowed. In view of the political
situation of that time in Soviet Latvia (especially from the
second half of the 1940s till 1970s) the art forms, such as
Dada, abstract art (and its variations), and even
impressionism, and postimpressionism (in the 1950s), were
forbidden and practically unknown to a wider audience
including the first authors of the computer drawings computer scientists and engineers in Soviet Latvia. They
hardly had any information about the contemporary art
forms of the 20th century. The politically dictated
mainstream of art was the Socialist Realism. This term was
introduced in 1934, and it was the only officially permitted
style of Soviet art.
The very first examples of computer drawings can be
found in the late 1960s. Undoubtedly, it is owing to the
appearance of better output devices and more appropriate
printing possibilities for graphics. The political background
dictates a completely different approach to the style and
aesthetics of this art form. Nobody, including the authors of

458

V.

computer drawings, accepted them as art. These examples
are anonymous, and only a very small part of them has
survived till nowadays. They are not signed at all due to
their completely different status in perception of the society,
as well as the authors’ own position. The computer
scientists and engineers were not tended to position their
experiments with data visualization as any form of visual
art. None of them in Latvia considered describing any
aspect of computer aesthetics.
The most common in Latvia were ASCII art forms.
These drawings have always tended to be realistic.
Sometimes they have the features characteristic to
caricatures or cartoons.
The Museum of Computer
Technique, IMCS UL in Latvia possesses the examples of
the first computer drawings.

Despite the official politics in Soviet Latvia some
kinetic and even conceptual, as well as environmental art
examples made by professional artists have emerged since
1970. This kind of contemporary art was often presented as
design proposals and some of them were realized in
cooperation with engineers and programmers. Political
criteria in this new zone were not clearly stated, and it
allowed making much more independent experiments.
Artists used the terms “applied art” and “design” to cover up
many contemporary artworks. “An important zone for new
pursuits in art during the 1970s in Latvia developed in the
border area between fine arts and applied arts – both offered
innovative solutions in form and focused on the issues of
space and environment… Among them the most avantgarde phenomena were kinetic art (actually the first
installations in Latvian art) and visionary environment
proposals... works of art created within this zone were
accepted by the institutions and enjoyed much more
publicity. At the same time the number of artists
representing this zone was tiny and the effect caused by
them in the complete art picture was perceived rather
ambiguously. ‘Is that art at all?”- the question was asked
many a time.” [4]
Most of these artworks appeared only few times in the
exhibitions dedicated to design. Some kinetic objects were
built and the communication design samples appeared. In
1980 the Riga Central Railway Station renovation project
was hold. A multi-program light system sinhronized with a
flow of time at the clock tower was realized. In nowadays
terms we can call it a synthesis of communication design
and conceptual art.

Figure 2. 3RUWUDLW RI &RPSXWHU 6FLHQWLVW (LåHQV ƖULƼã 3RUWUDLW RI
(QJLQHHU -ƗQLV 'DXEH; 3RUWUDLW RI &KLHI $FFRXQWDQW -ƗQLV .DXJDUV.

The realistic series of portraits seems to be the best and
more serious part of all drawings. The sitters were close
colleagues, hence warm and more personal attitude
penetrate these artworks.
Portrait of Lenin is a digitalisation from the communist
party leader's portrait in the Kremlin Congress Palace,
Moscow (known from photos in newspapers). The authors
of this digitalisation have made an attempt to produce an
artwork following the Soviet art standards. Mother and
Child is a similar digitalisation of some Soviet style drawing
or painting. It was done in honour to the International
Women's day (an official holiday in USSR).
Even prohibited ‘underground’ things (no wonder,
considering the political status of Latvia at that time) like
drawings of nudes appeared.

Figure 3.

CONCEPTUAL AND KINETIC ART UNDER THE DESIGN
UMBRELLA

Figure 4. $UWǌUV 5LƼƷLV .LQHWLF 3DLQWLQJ  Riga Central Railway
station clock tower with multi-programme synchronous lighting system.
1980.

In 1994 Journal Leonardo dedicated the whole issue to
the art, science and technology in the former Soviet Union.
Two Latvian artists – Valdis Celms and ArtǌUV 5LƼƷis –
artists with a design background published their articles
here.
Environmental designer and artist -ƗQLV %RUJV HYHQ KDG
created an artwork simulating the computer drawing, instead
of computer using traditional technique. “I contributed [at
the exhibition of work by the teaching staff of the high
school of art– S.Z.] with an entirely incongruous work –

Portrait of Lenin; Mother and Child; Nude.

459

three sheets of technical drawings, consisting of
arrangements of black lines. This was ‘programmed art’,
where the will of the artist plays no role. It had been created
entirely by means of a programme, using the principle of
complete randomness to determine the composition of the
elements. The works were intended to be created by
computer, but in those days there was no technical
equipment of this kind available, and so everything had to
be done by hand. In other words – it was the imitation of
computer art. From the traditional prospective of art it was
absolute nonsense. But I’d decided on a shameless display
of conceptualism, which was so important to me at the time,
and because of which I’d already established extensive
international connections with like-minded people. It seems
that my traditionalist colleagues, who had no experience in
this field, deliberately hung them the wrong way up, or so
they thought. The joke flopped, because in this case the
arrangement had no significance, and I kept a straight face.”
[5]
VI.

collaboration ZLWK (VWKHU 3RODN DQG ,HYD $X]LƼa. The aim
of the visualization was to share GPS-information by
showing as clearly as possible how, when and at what speed
the movements through the landscape had taken place. In
the privacy of their own homes, we showed the paths to
each of the participants, and are happy to be able to share
them with you. Finally, we would now like to invite you to
enter the website, to meet all the nice people who drew the
line on the Map.” [6]
Professional artists were initiators of collaboration with
scientists and the IT industry. Some Latvian contemporary
artists have successful cooperation with our computer
scientists and physicists in developing their art projects. In
 QHZ PHGLD DUWLVW *LQWV *DEUƗQV  FUHDWHG SURMHFW
“Paramirrors” and presented it in the Latvian pavilion on the
52nd International Art Exhibition of La Biennale di
Venezia, Venice, Italy. It was done in collaboration with
ElmƗrs Blǌms, Institute of Physics of the University of
/DWYLD ,O]H $XOLND 9LVPDQWV =DXOV 0ƗUWLƼã 5XWNLV
Institute of Solid State Physics of the University of Latvia
DQG -ƗQLV 6SƯJXOLV ,QVWLWXWH RI $WRPLF 3K\VLFV DQG
Spectroscopy, University of Latvia.

NEW MEDIA ART DEVELOPMENT AT THE TURN OF
THE 21ST CENTURY

In 1991, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the
borders were opened and the new media art (now computer
art is often considered as a part of it) began to develop in
Latvia. It happened at the same time as in the world
elsewhere. The development of the World Wide Web was
the main precondition. Young Latvian artists (Rasa Šmite,
Raitis Šmits $UYƯGV $ONVQLV and others) actively started
wide international collaboration. They established E-Lab
(later renamed as RIXC) – an electronic art and media centre
in Riga, and created the mailing list ‘Xchange’ as an
information and communication channel for the net
broadcasters.
Annual new media festival in Riga “Art and
Communication” first organized by RIXC (Centre for New
Media Culture in Riga) in 1996 has acquired international
recognition amidst the world’s digital community. Artists
prompted to cover such issues as Transbiotics (2010),
Energy (2009), Spectropia (2008), Spectral Ecology (2007),
Waves (2006), Media Architecture (2003).
/DWYLDQ DUWLVWV ,HYD $X]LƼD DQG 5DLWLV âPLWV LQLWLDWHG DQ
international art project called 'Milk project'. It won the
Prix Ars Electronica ‘Golden Nica’ in 2005.
“The MilkLine is one of the countless movements of the
international food trade, in this case milk, produced by
Latvian farmers, made into cheese by a local factory with
the help of an Italian expert, transported to the Netherlands,
stored in a charming Dutch cheese warehouse to ripen, sold
at the Utrecht market and finally eaten by Dutch citizens.
This map follows the milk from the udder of the cow to the
plate of the consumer, by means of the people involved. All
those involved were given a GPS device for a day: one of
the days when they were somehow occupied with the
movements of this dairy. Special GPS-visualization
software developed for Milk project by Marcus The, in

CONCLUSIONS
Some crucial differences between Western and Soviet
Latvia computer art should be mentioned.
x

x
x

Due to political reasons the scientists and engineers
– the first authors of the computer art – were not
familiar with modern art theories and practice of the
20th century.
The common style of computer drawings should be
considered as realistic style ASCII art.
Some artifacts done by professional artists in
collaboration with engineers and programmers of
kinetic art were covered under the term design.

Internet art and the new media art development
established the role of Latvian art in the digital field during
the second half of the 1990s.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

460

6 =DULƼD ³&RPSXWHU 6FLHQWLVWV DV (DUO\ 'LJLWDO $UWLVWV´ 6FLHQWLILF
Papers of the University of Latvia, vol. 752, Riga: University of
Latvia, 2011, in press.
Electronic Publication: http://www.leonardo.info/isast/leostory.html
H. Franke and H. Helbig, “Generative Mathematics: Mathematically
Described and Calculated Visual Art,” Leonardo, vol. 25, 1992, pp.
291–294.
Exhibition catalogue, “AND OTHERS. Movements, Explorations and
Artists in Latvia 1960 – 1984,” Riga: The Latvian Centre for
Contemporary Art, 2010.
J. Borgs, “Taking a different direction... ,” Studija, vol. 76, 2010, pp.
38–44.
Electronic Publication: http://milkproject.net/en/index.html

