Analysis of Correspondences between Real and Virtual Worlds in General
Public Applications
Stéphane Natkin
CEDRIC/ CNAM
natkin@cnam.fr

Abstract
Using a mix of wireless telecommunication, digital
audiovisuals and the Internet, the digital
entertainments have evolved to a new form of
interaction based on mobile ubiquitous computing and
mixed reality. Our work is devoted to the application
using both reality and virtuality in a complex mixed
mode. Our research goal is to highlight constructive
schemes (interfaces, narrative structure…) which can
be used in the design of interactive media production.
This paper is devoted to the analysis and the
classification of the possible relationship between
virtual worlds (VW) and real worlds (RW). It focuses
on the general public, in particular entertainment
applications. We discuss a general model of the
RW/VW interactions and present a classification of
applications. Some significant examples are discussed
as a conclusion.

1. Introduction
From a cultural point of view, one of the main
aspects of the last century is the development of
communication networks: telephone, radio, television.
At the end of the century, the growth of the Internet
Network suggests a new communication revolution
relying on interactive media. But, which type of
sociological relations and which type of new contents
will be induced by interactive networks?
One way to understand this evolution is to consider
the increasingly complex relationships between the real
world and the virtual world, in multiplayer games and
more generally in entertainment applications.
For example:
• Proactive games like Majestic or In
Memoriam use email and the phone to interact
with the current activity of the player.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Chen Yan
France Telecom R&D & CEDRIC/CNAM
chen.yan@francetelecom.com

•

It is well known that massive multiplayer on
line games have complex economic systems
and that some of the virtual goods produced
can be sold on the “real market”. In addition
there is more complex behaviour like the
production of virtual forged currency which is
then sold in the real market.
• Mobile phone localization is already used to
facilitate the meeting of multiplayer gamers.
In advanced applications there is a mapping
between the topology in the virtual world and
the topology in the real one.
• Augmented reality games use the real space
and time as the frame of an adventure, where
virtual characters appear through mobile
interfaces such as goggles.
• There have already been several attempts to
use them in real time events (sports, variety
shows even political events) broadcasted
through media such as radio and TV as the
background of a game played on an iTV set.
Mixed reality worlds may be used and are already
experienced in numerous application domains: art
installations, video and augmented reality games, data
visualisation systems, medical training systems,
military simulations…
From a technical point of view new concepts and
devices such as mobile and ubiquitous computing,
tangible interfaces, smart devices… are changing the
scene. The next generation media will rely on the cross
media uniform platform: the user may interact with the
same interactive virtual world using all of the possible
devices: home cinema, computers, interactive TV sets,
PDA, mobile phone… The media interface will be
automatically adapted to the device. A rather simple
(and poor) vision of this platform is the automatic
transformation of a web page from a computer
interface to a mobile phone one. A much more
advanced understanding of the unified platform can be
forecast in terms of possible contents and in particular

the next generation of games. The most advanced
feature of the uniform platform is the ability to mix
broadcast passive media and active media into a
unified medium.
More generally these examples foresee the
development of a new generation of interactive media
using both reality and virtuality in a complex mixed
mode. But there is no general understanding of the type
of entertainment which can be supported by this type
of media and, of course, no underlying narrative
theory. Our research goal is to highlight constructive
schemes (interfaces, narrative structure…) which can
be used in the design of interactive media production.
As a starting point, this paper tries to classify and
clarify some concepts used in the analysis of the
possible relationship between virtual worlds (VW) and
real worlds (RW). We will focus on the general public
and in particular on entertainment applications. The
first section presents a general model of the
relationship between RW and VW and states a
terminology. The second section gives a classification
of applications. The last section presents some
VW/RW systems through our analysis criteria.

2. Real and Virtual worlds
2.1. RW/VW considered as reactive systems
In this section we will define the main components
of the kind of systems we are dealing with. As the
Virtual World is continuously modified by the action
of the users and, at least from the user's cognitive point
of view, the real world is altered by the events in the
Virtual World, we are considering a particular class of
reactive systems. In the terminology of the process
control, a reactive system is such that “the computation
proceeds by the computer indefinitely reacting on
stimuli from the environment, thus achieving an effect
in the physical world (and not only computing a
value)... A central aspect of such systems seems to be
that they maintain a state, something which is alien to
the functional style. The concept of state in these
applications is fundamental and should not be confused
with the states in conventional languages.”
In the RW there are one or several people who
know that their actions may interact with the virtual
world. We will call these people the users of the
system. This means that users have a representation in
the virtual world whose behavior is perceptible to
them. This does not always mean that users fully
control their representation and, moreover, the
influence of their actions on the virtual world.
The identification of a user in the virtual space is
known as "avatar" or "alter ego". This covers different

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

concepts which are sometimes confusing. In artistic
installations and solo video games, the proxy of the
interactor is the alter ego, which is a presentation of the
player himself in the game. It can be a character, a
cursor (for example a hand in the Black and White
Game, the virtual limbs of the player in a first person
game)… The alter ego reacts in real time to the player's
actions.
Avatar is a word originally from the Hindu religion.
It is a support of the user's customisation, and normally
is used for a social interaction [24]. The user creates
his avatar, which is an anonymous and dynamic
character put in charge to explore the VW. The avatar
can be partly autonomous (have some behaviour which
is not only the real time and direct representation of the
user's actions) without the control of the player.
As with the control process systems (see Figure 1.),
the VW computation system updates a model of the
same objects in the RW. This leads to the consideration
of which objects of the RW are taken into account in
this model. The part of the real world which is in
relation with the virtual world includes many things:
the physical interface, the multimedia system which
can be very complex, the physical environment of the
user, and other objects. Most of the interactions
between the RW and the VW are known and are
generally a consequence of the system design. For
example the computation loops estimate the state of the
interface device control buttons. In some mobile
games, the game estimates the location of each player.
It can be physical variables such as the location of the
users, the time of the day or the weather, but it can also
be much more abstract variables such as the user's
emotional state, estimated through some biometrics
measurement, or the value of stock exchange prices,
received through the Internet. It can also be related to
other people who are not aware of their interactions
with the VW, for example the number of people in a
given place at a given time.
In all of these examples there is a representation of
the real object characteristics in the VW programming
data. But the designer often makes explicit hypotheses
about the state of the real world. For example a game
designer may assume that a player who is interested
and able to play his game is immerged in the oriental
culture and is aged between 15 and 25 years. These
characteristics are generally not coded in the program
but can be found in the system documentation.
At last, advanced augmented reality systems (for
example on line games), generate some non predicted
interactions between the RW and the VW. For example
virtual objects can be sold in the RW through the
Internet, which, of course have an impact on the RW
economy. These kinds of relationships are a key point

of our study, but it is still very difficult to make a clear
and complete classification of them.
According to the three previous cases, in the real
world we consider three kinds of objects which are
able to interact with the system through the value of
their characteristics:
Explicitly represented Real Objects (ERO), Implicitly
represented Real Objects (IRO) and Unpredicted
interacting Real Objects (URO). We call, at a given
time the current value of the state of theses objects, the
RW state or context.
The VW model is based on a state variable
representation. We distinguish two types of virtual
objects, the ones which are images of real objects
(Image Virtual Object: IVO), which may include some
estimates of real world variables; and the Purely

At the boundary of the VW and the RW is the
interface (see Figure 1). In the RW the interface starts
with the user senses and limbs acting as sensors and
actuators. Perception and actions are performed
through physical devices starting with a screen and a
mouse and leading to much more sophisticated
immersive environment. The RW may also use data
from other RW phenomenon such as the weather, the
location of the user’s car or the results of a football
championship. Some of this information is measured
by dedicated captors; other bits are taken from general
information systems through, for example, the Internet.
In a symmetrical way the VW gathers information
received from the RW through virtual captors and
sends commands to the RW through virtual actuators.
Following [15] we call the Interactive Surface the

Real World

Virtual World

Real World State/Context

Virtual World State/Context

command

RW

VW

Captors

Actuators

control

USERS
command
control

- Limbs/Body
- Senses

control

SURFACE

RW

VW

Actuators

Captors

command

VW

VW

Simulator

Artificial
Intelligence

Figure 1. Control process system between RW and VW.
Virtual Objects (PVO) who have no match in the RW.
We call, at a given time the current value of the state of
these objects, the VW state or context. In the virtual
world processing system we distinguish two
components: the Simulator and the AI. The simulator
is in charge of managing all rendering characteristics
of the object and, when it is needed to simulate
physical or abstract laws which manage the VW. For
example in a game it can be simulated weather. The AI
components deal with any mechanism which makes
some decisions depending on the RW state. For
example in games the AI manages Non Player
Characters (NPC) and the player opponents.

2.2. Interface

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

physical materialization of the information which
flows from the RW to the VW and vice-versa. The
content of the interface defines the type of data flowing
through the interface.
The use of ubiquitous computing as an interface
between RW and VW is one of the starting points of
our work. So we recall the main aspects of this concept
and technology. Ubiquitous computers are embedded
in the daily life objects which can be communicated
among them and adapts their behaviors for different
users, different locations and situations (smart objects).
These objects may always be active as sensors and
actuators in the real world or may decide to exchange
data between themselves and with the user in a proactive mode. In this case the interface between the RW
and the VW is fully distributed in terms of time and

space, leading to the perception of a VW omnipresent
and diffused through the whole reality.
A smart object is an apparatus or a functional
device which has a capacity or an aptitude to receive or
emit information, often coming from a data-processing
network. It is also called "Information Appliance",
"Communication Appliance", or "Smart Appliance"
[28]. There are three levels of this functionality,
according to an increasing order of autonomy:
- Reactive: these objects can supply different
services or have different functions based on the
reorganization of their consumers' actions by gesture,
by voice, by touch…It can be, for example, household
or domestic electrical appliances.
- Half-autonomous: this kind of object can interact
with the consumer, and also, in some circumstances,
behave by themselves without human intervention. For
example, Tamagotchi or Lovegety are two types of
half-autonomous systems.
- Autonomous: in this case, the toy always has an
autonomous behavior, which depends on the user's
actions. This kind of system is often called a "robot",
in particular when it looks like a humanoid or an
animal.

2.3. Virtual world classification
It is normal to classify Virtual Worlds according to
the nature of objects and the type of relationship
between objects in these worlds.
Abstract VW manages representations of
documents and more generally abstract concepts. A
large hypermedia system is a typical example.
Semantic relations symbolized through iconic models
are the key to the user's navigation. The rules of the
VW evolution do not try to simulate any physical
phenomenon such as gravity. The interface device is
generally a standard keyboard and a screen, but there
have been some attempts to use more immersive
systems such as a pair of 3D goggles and a 3D mouse.
At the other end, Virtual Reality and Augmented
Reality systems simulate a physical universe directly in
relation to the real one. The immersive quality of the
VW and its interface is a key point of the application.
The interface is designed to react to the reflex actions
of the user. The navigation simulates continuous travel
in a 3D world.
Between these two limiting classes, there is a
continuum of VW which has been experimented on. In
a given application, several classes of objects, relations
and navigation schemes may be used. For example a
platform game, like Ray Man (Ubisoft, released in
1999), uses simple simulations of physical laws in
action phases. The navigation is based on the reflex
skills of the player to move his alter ego and make it

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

jump. But in other game phases, the player must solve
enigmas and take strategic decisions using an interface
which manages abstract concepts.

3. Nature of Application
As the goal of this paper is to understand the
possible evolution of mass media in relation to general
usage of inter-personal communications, we are mainly
interested in all of the applications designed for general
public. So professional applications dedicated to a
specific sector are out of the scope of this paper.
Type 1: Art installations
Interactive digital arts have been experienced since
the early 70’s. The interactive installation THE MAZE
which was presented at the Memorial Union Gallery of
Wisconsin University in 1971 is one of the first
experiments based on the aesthetics of interactions.
Network art installation was stated in the 80’s through,
for example, the experiments of the International
Electronic Café presented at the Venice art Biennial in
1986.
Some artistic installations do not consider
spectators as users as defined in the previous sections.
Even if the spectator behavior modifies the system
behavior, the spectator is not able to control these
modifications. In the scope of this paper we are only
dealing with installations where the spectator is a user
and, through an alter ego or an avatar, and he has the
conscience of his action. In many cases, he feels that
he is one of the producers of the artwork.
It is possible to distinguish two kinds of art
installations:
- The system is mainly an instrument which allows the
user to control a natural physical phenomenon in real
time. As with classical instruments, the user produces
sounds, images, smells, tactile sensations… but
generally through an innovative interface and in a
multimodal mode. The training of the system relies on
the understanding of the principle of the instrument
and on its practice.
- The system includes a more or less complex
virtual world. This world has a memory so reactions to
user's input are not always instantaneous. To interfere
with the world and eventually with other users through
this world, the user must practice the interface but also
understand the rules of the virtual world.
Type 2: Entertainment
Entertainment is a diversion that holds the
attention. In our context, we only keep an interest in

the interactive digital entertainment (IDE). We
consider three classes of IDE.
Type 2-1: Games
Play has a much larger sense than the game. Play is
recreation often guided by imagination, but a game is
guided by fixed rules, and a goal to be reached with a
winning and losing issue. Here we use the word
"game" to refer to the sport, the leisure or the game,
where the computer technologies augment the physical
effort, the social interaction, and the amusement. Most
of the video games are in the scope of this paper.
One should argue that “classical” solo games are
very simple virtual worlds which have no impact on
the real world (except on the player's behaviour). This
is obviously not true. A good counter example is the
Sims and the Sims 2 games. They have been designed
to drive users to create, exchange and sell virtual
objects in the RW. The Sims also includes advertising,
whose explicit goal is to change the user's
consumptions also in the RW. Of course this kind of
complex social and economical relationship between
the RW and the VW is a part of the on line games
design. Closed community games, such as Counter
Strike or Starcraft, have generated a new kind of RW
collective sports with their own worldwide
championships. The social issues of MMOG
(Massively Multipalyer On Line Games) are well
known. Recent studies also show the effects of URO
on the RW economy through, for example, the ability
to sell in the RW forged virtual currencies.
From the point of view of this paper we will
consider the following classification criterion:
- Solo games VS multiplayer games.
- Solo games with or without an explicit RW social
goal (the Sims as opposed to Metal Gear Solid).
-Closed community VS Open community
multiplayer games. In the first category the player is
able to choose their game partners and opponents
(Counter Strike). In open games, anybody who has an
internet access can participate (Lineage).
- Chosen interaction VS Pro-active games. The first
category includes most of the games: the time and the
place to play are always chosen by the player. Majestic
(Electronic Art multiplayer games, released in 2001)
and In Memoriam (Lexis Numerique / Ubisoft game,
released in 2003) are examples of Pro active games:
the game can interfere with the player's life at
unpredictable times through, for example, his mobile
phone or his electronic mail.
- Virtual Reality (VRG) VS Augmented Reality
video Games (ARG). In the first category all the game
objects are in the VW and managed through the system
interface. In the second category some games objects

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

are RW objects perceived directly through the user
senses. Well known and complex examples of ARG
have been studied in the Singapore University (Human
Pac Man for example, [12]). Much simpler ARG
games, such as a virtual treasure hunt in a real town,
based on the location capabilities of mobile phones
have been experienced (The Mogi game, Newtgames
2003, [30])
- A particular class of ARG and Pro-active games is
Ubigame (Ubiquitous Game) which is a new type of
mobile games. They rely on the principles and the
technology of ubiquitous computing.
Type 2-2: Toys
A toy is an artifact designed to be played with. The
difference between toys and games is the absence of a
challenge in toys. Tamagotchi and more general
simulations of ecological systems are good examples
of toys which include the management of a VW. From
a psychological, sociological and design point of view
toys are quite different than games, but the same
relationships between RW and VW can be made in
both areas. So most of the topics discussed about
games can be applied to toys. Nevertheless, in the
sequel, we will consider that toys are interacting with
the user through a dedicated smart object, which is
considered by the user as the “toy” in itself. Toys can
also be used as input or output devices for different
platforms. For example, the SWEETPEA project,
carried out by Xerox Palo Alto and MIT [26], uses the
electrical doll "Barney" as an anthropomorphic
interface device for PCs, printers, etc.
Type 2-3: Interactive show
We classify an extension of mass media systems as
an interactive show. One may forecast the possible
application of interactive television. As we only
consider the case where the spectator is a user, with a
representative in a virtual world, this leaves trivial
applications out of the scope of this paper, like voting
for a star or the evolution of a scenario. An example of
experiments in an interactive show is given in [37]
where a spectator “Mr Beans” decides to participate
virtually in a car race which is broadcasted on his
television. His “virtual car” appears on the TV set
mixed to the live broadcasted race images. A dedicated
virtual character comments on this specific race
between worldwide champions and Mr Beans. As the
iTV are connected through an IP network, Mr Bean
can ask one of his friends, who is somewhere else
looking at the same event, to join him in a second
virtual car. Even if these examples are at a research

state, it opens a lot of important problems related to the
relationship between RW and VW.
It opens the field where RW events (sport,
economy, political) broadcasted through mass media
become a part of the VW.
It leads to the analysis of the possible feasible
interactions between real and virtual objects in nondedicated situations.
It leads to a research of new interaction
principles in a wide public environment.
It enlarges some ethical issues about the
perception of real and virtual information in mass
media.
Type 3: Virtual assistance
A virtual assistance is a virtual activity that
provides any kind of help to people in their every day
life. Virtual assistance starts with the GPS electronic
maps which show the best path to a given location. The
correspondence between RW and VW is, in this case,
trivial to understand: the virtual space is the map, and
the user is represented by a cursor located at its current
location. But Virtual assistance now covers much more
sophisticated applications from medical assistance to
travel services. Virtual assistance can be an application
of a virtual agora or a telepresence space: the user who
needs help is in a pro-active communication with
someone able to provide this help. But in other cases
the work is done by an intelligent agent which can be,
for example, represented by a virtual character giving
advice. As an example, the virtual assistance, in the
project of "AURA" of Carnegie Mellon University
provides each user with an invisible halo of computing
and information services that persists regardless of
their location [21].
Type 4: Training
Computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL)
is computer supported collaborative work (CSCW) in
the goal of acquiring skill or knowledge. It is probably
the general public application of collaborative work
which has the fastest growth. An incredible amount of
studies have been devoted to this subject (See Barnon
1989 for a survey). Only a part of CSCW is relevant to
our work as most of the CSCL environment does not
includes a representation of the user in the virtual
training space.
Type 5: Access and sharing data
Access and sharing complex data may be
considered as the main goal of all information systems.
In our context we consider only applications which

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

define a VW as a means to represent, access, retrieve
and share complex information. A typical example is a
3D interface for digital libraries [16]. A tangible
interface is often used in this kind of application which
permits the user to directly physically manipulate the
virtual data, as demonstrated in Triangles [22].
Type 6: Space
The goal of the relationship between the RW and
the VW can be to define a meeting area for various
social purposes. Virtual meeting spaces are used in all
of the previous applications. Many dedicated
collaborative environments also have this property. We
have kept a Meeting Space as an application by itself
as there are proposals of meeting spaces without
dedicated uses, from a virtual urbanism point of view.
Type 6-1: Virtual Agora
Agora is a place of assembly for the people in
ancient Greece. A virtual agora is a virtual place of
virtual interaction and virtual socialisation. Forum,
chats and blogs can be considered as the simplest
virtual Agora, and the first historical “social” use of the
Internet as discussion spaces. All of these spaces are
mainly textual; the image appears through ideograms
and fixed avatars. The ability to exchange MIME
(Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) documents
was initiated in the late 90’s. The use of voice
communications and real time 2D and 3D meeting
spaces started at the beginning of this century using a
technology of on line games. The support of the
multipart on line video on the Internet is forecasted for
the next few years. UMTS ((Universal Mobile
Telecommunication System) and, more generally
wireless technology, allow access to all of these
advanced Agora through mobile terminals. These
capabilities create new uses of virtual agora, such as
collective creations or even on line parties. "There"
[47], is a famous virtual 3D agora on the web which
offers a virtual world that enables users to connect and
collaborate just as they would in the real world. Users
can explore, play, shop, meet new friends, talk, create,
and have special events days like Halloween and
Valentine's Day, etc.
Type 6-2: Intelligent Space
Space here means a physical place for people with
natural and physical interaction towards the VW.
- Telepresence is a new communication medium
that enables a person to feel present in a different place
or time. The idea of telepresence as a media, a new
communication experience, is not about the

technological feat, but the sensation of "being there",
“the absence of disbelief”. The issue of communication
is to create a shared virtual space which is the union of
the real spaces where communicating partners are
located. For example, the THOLOS System [48] is a
telepresence wall installed in the city square, which
allows people to communicate in real time between
different capitals.
- A Smart Space is a closed or open area where
computers, smart objects, or multimodal sensors are
embedded. The goal is to allow users to work or live
“more efficiently”. Smart Spaces may identify and
perceive users, their actions, and even their goals,
facilitate their interactions with rich sources of
information, anticipate user's needs during task
performances, support distributed and local
collaborations, etc. According to their usability, it can
be a smart work space, or a smart living space.
Examples of Smart Spaces are IBM's Dreamspace [31]
and Microsoft's Easyliving [8]. Their computing
systems all use the concepts of context-aware and
location-aware. The captors allows voice, body
gestures…inputs. The virtual system tracks all the real
contexts in the space, maps the topology of the space
(the room) and specifies the tasks (services) for
different situations for different users. User’s activity
and the contents in the space are then recognized by
the system.

4. Example of RW/VW relationship
The four following examples show how the concept
introduced in this paper can be used to understand and
classify. It also shows the incredible complexity of the
VW/RW relationship in existing applications.
"Bubbles" [36], is an artistic interactive installation
using a video-tracking system. The visitor walks in
front of the projector, and casts his own shadow on the
projection screen. Virtual bubbles rebound on the
shadow contour emitting a sound. By moving his body
and the resulting shadow, the visitor can play with the
bubbles and the sound composition. In this case the
RW includes a single user, the demonstration room and
its lightning and acoustic characteristics which are all
ERO objects. The user controls the system through his
body. The RW captor is composed by a light projector
and the light sensitive surface on which the shadow
appears. VW actuator is the contouring process. The
VW Captors are the compositing process
(superposition of the shadow and the bubbles) and the
sound engine. RW actuators are the HP and the surface
on which bubbles and shadows are drawn. The VW
world context is only composed by the representation
of the shadow (IVO) and the bubbles (PVO). The

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Virtual World processing system is composed by the
simulator which computes the evolution of bubbles and
sounds. According to our classification, this art
installation is mainly a system of the reactive
instruments.
Even if the history of the Internet networks
contents from its beginning have some aspects of on
line games (MOD’s, textual version of Dungeons and
Dragons was already available on the net in the early
eighties), the first real persistent on line universes are
Meridian, EverQuest, Ultima OnLine and Asheron’s
Call. These games were released in the late nineties.
Most of the games available on a commercial basis still
rely on the same principles, even if performances and
interfaces have considerably evolved. Negative social
impacts of MMOG have been observed. Even if, in this
case, the interface between the RW and the VW is a
standard computer, the relationship between these two
worlds is very complex. A MMOG is a persistent
world; thousands of players share a huge virtual
landscape including villages and cities, with numerous
non playing characters… A MMOG is also a shared
virtual society whose rules are initially defined by the
game designers but which evolves with the demand of
the player’s community. The rules allow creating and
permanent management or temporary grouping and
include a trade system. More generally, a MMOG is in
constant evolution. It is necessary to revive the interest
of the players, to cope with undesirable social
behaviors and correct bugs. All of these features define
the PVO as a complex dynamic system. The ability to
create and to improve each player avatar, to develop
social skills and to get a recognized position in the
game community is an essential feature of the
gameplay, so the player representation is also a
complex IVO. MMOGs have direct impact on the RW,
in particular on its economy: MMOGs are used to
promote RW products through advertising [6]. These
aspects and the user’s community are remarkable
EROs. The language and more generally the virtual
social rules are, of course defined for a given origin of
users: a game like Lineage is played in Asian
countries. Dark Age of Camelot is mainly played in
western countries. The corresponding game
characteristics determine non trivial IROs. Unpredicted
complex behaviors and the relationship between RW
and VW have been also observed; Players can sell
virtual objects and even leave from this trade. The
player's unpredictable usages of the game objects have
to be forecasted and even encouraged, as long as it
does not put the “correct” social structure of the
community into danger. Undesirable player behaviors
must be constantly detected and corrected. Game
providers supply social rules and police services (such
as in Internet chats) based on programmed intelligent

agents but also on human intervention. The trade of
forged virtual currencies has already been considered
as a feedback loop between the RW and VW economy
[10].
In ubigames, the correspondence between RW and
VW appears in the physical contexts, with implications
that VW is rapidly becoming as significant as RW
objects, places, etc. The MMOG "Mogi" (NewtgameTM
2003) or "Botfighters2" (AliveMobileTM 2000) are good
examples in this category. They are both locationbased mobile multiplayer games. The scenario of Mogi
is simply to seek and collect virtual objects with a
mobile phone; the goal is to accumulate points by
supplementing collections. As for Botfighters2, it is a
location-based action FPS MMOG. The player has to
attack other players with his mobile phone while
moving in the streets of an RW town, stealing secret
information, destroying the enemy's installations, etc.
Both of the two games use the positions of the players
in the landscape and the landscape itself to generate the
play. The main interface is the phone, but some actions
can be performed on a standard PC through the
Internet. The Captors are the phone systems and
location capabilities, but some information (the
weather in the town) is taken from various sources on
the Internet. These data are an image of the real
context: locations of players, the special places in the
city, and natural law as day and night (ERO). The
virtual contexts are a map of the town, the time of the
day, the weather and the location of the player (IVO).
The location and the characteristics of virtual objects in
the real town are the PVOs.
The robot toys "Tamagotchi" (Maita 1997),
"Furby" (Hampton 1998), "Aibo" (Doi 2000) and other
speaking dolls derived from "Barbie", robot dogs "Poochi" & "I-Cybie" (Tiger ElectronicsTM 2000), robot cat
"Miaou-Chi" (HasbroTM 2001), and dinosaur "DinoChi" (Tiger ElectronicsTM 2001) are good examples of
programmable smart objects. "Microsoft Barney is a
plush purple dinosaur that can talk, sing, and play
games. Barney can also be controlled by a RF device
that plugs into your television set or PC and can pick
up instructions striped on the TV signal or encoded in
the software to control the child's toy. In many ways,
Barney offers even more potential than Barbie since
Barney also has input sensors (in his paws and a lightsensor behind his eyes) and can move his limbs” [4].
The actions (intentional or un-intentional) of a child
induce various behaviors in Barney: When the child
covers the eyes of Barney, it plays Peekaboo (simple
child’s game); if a child shakes one of Barney's hands,
it plays a game; if two hands are shaken, Barney sings
a song; if one hand and one foot are shaken, Barneys
goes to sleep (turns off)... Barney by itself is out of the
goal of our study: there is no clear VW and no

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

representation of the user. But Barney is a good
candidate as the interface of an ubiquitous system:
program a memory of events into Barney and you get a
virtual world state. Add a learning mechanism to
Barney which allows the recognition of children (a
microphone and a voice authentication system) and
analyze his behavior (a simple neural network) and you
get a representation of the user. These features are
already implemented in other domestic robots or in
games. Even if Barneys processing capabilities are not
sufficient to implement these functions, Barney can be
seen as the interface between the RW and a VW
implemented in a PC, connected to Barney through a
wireless network. For such a toy, the user controls the
system through his hand and his voice. The RW EROs
are Barney’s potential user’s and the physical
environment characteristics needed to calibrate the
captors. The IRO is the language used by the children
playing with Barney. The physical interface is Barneys
input sensors and the microphone, the VW captors are
the sound analyzer and the captors filtering system.
The VW context has long term memory variables
which allow the identification of the playing children
and short term variables to understand and react to
children's actions (IVO). Barney’s autonomous
behavior implemented as a fuzzy automaton would be
PVO. The RW actuators are Barney’s limb motion
systems and the embedded HP which produces
Barney’s voice.

5. Conclusion and Future Works
This paper proposes a model of possible
relationships between RW and VW, which leads to a
characterization of existing systems. This will help us
to understand and to analyze a large variety of
interactive multimedia applications. We need extensive
experiments of the possible values of each criterion,
especially to take care of the user’s knowledge as a
part of the RW context. Next steps lead to the
evaluation and formalization of some narration and
gameplay... schemes which govern interesting
relationship between RW and VW. Eventually, this
may lead to general patterns for VW designers.

References
[1] G.D. Abowd, C.G. Atkeson, J. Hong, S. Long, R.
Kooper, and M. Pinkerton, "Cyberguide: a Mobile ContextAware Tour Guide", Wireless Networks 3(5):421-33, 1997.
[2] AliveMobile, available on line:
http://www.botfighters.com/about/

[3] R. Baggeton and A. Morch, "Coordination as Resource in
Collaborative Telelearning", Department of Information
Science, University of Bergen, Norway, 2000.

[17] R. Dahiya, "E-CUBes: Toys for Active Learning in
Early Childhood", Master Thesis of Interaction Design
Institute Ivrea, Ahmedabad, India, June 2003.

[4] Barney 2004, “Exploring Software Tools for
Programmable Embodied Agents, or Hacking Microsoft
Barney”, available on line: http://www.geekchick.com/

[18] A. K. Dey and G. D. Abowd, "Towards a Better
Understanding of Context and Context-Awareness", CHI
2000 Workshop on the What, Who, Where, When, Why and
How of Context-Awareness, April, 2000.

[5] BBC R&D, "Mixed Reality Productions of the Future",
available on line:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/projects/MixTV/index.shtml

[19] P. Dourish, "Where the Action is; the Foundations of
Embodied Interaction", Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

[6] B. Book, "Avertising and Branding in Social Virtual
Worlds", available on line:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=536422

[20] M. Flintham, R. Anastasi, S. Benford et al., "Where OnLine Meets On-the-Streets: Experiences with Mobile Mixed
Reality Games", Proceedings of CHI'03, 2003.

[7] M. Billinghurst and H. Kato, "Collaborative Mixed
Reality", Proceedings First International Symposium on
Mixed Reality (ISMR'99), 1999, pp.261-284.

[21] D. Garlan, D. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic, and P.
Steenkiste, "Project Aura: Toward Distraction-Free Pervasive
Computing", IEEE Pervasive Computing, April-June, 2002.

[8] B. Brumitt, B. Meyers, J. Krumm, A. Kern, and S. Shafer,
"EasyLiving: Technologies for Intelligent Environments",
Proceedings of the International Conference on Handheld
and Ubiquitous Computing, Springer, 2000, pp.12-29.

[22] M. Gorbet, M. Orth, and H. Ishii, "Triangles: Tangible
Interface for Manipulation and Exploration of Digital
Information Topography," Proceedings of Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '98), ACM, Los
Angeles, April 1998, pp. 49-56.

[9] E. Castronova, "Virtual Worlds: A First-Hand Account of
Market and Society on the Cyberian Frontier", CESifo
Working Paper Series No. 618, December, 2001.
[10] G. Cato, "MMOs: It's the Economy Stupid", available on
line: http://overanalyzed.com/printview.php?t=19&start=0
[11] G. L. Chen and D. Kotz, "A Survey of Context-Aware
Mobile Computing Research", Dartmouth College Technical
Report TR2000-381, November, 2000.
[12] A. D. Cheok et al., "Human Pacman: A Mobile
Entertainment System with Ubiquitous Computing and
Tangible Interaction over a Wide Outdoor Area", Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing, Volume 8, Issue 2, May 2004,
pp. 71 – 81.
[13] J. Cooperstock, K. Tanikoshi, G. Beirne, T. Narine, and
W. Buxton, "Evolution of a Reactive Environment",
Proceedings of CHI ’95, 1995, pp.170-177.
[14] S. Cornett, "The Usability of Massively Multiplayer
Online Roleplaying Games: Designing for New Users",
Proceedings of CHI'04, Volume 6, N°1, April, 2004, pp.703710.
[15] J. Coutaz, C. Lachenal, F. Berard, and N. Barralon,
"Quand les Surfaces Deviennent Interactives …", Les
Cahiers du Numérique, Lavoisier, Volume 3, N° 4, 2002,
pp.101-126.
[16] P. Cubaud, J. Dupire, A. Topol, "Digitization and 3D
Modeling of Movable Books", ACM-IEEE Joint Conference
on Digital Libraries, Denver, USA, June, 2005.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[23] K. B. Heaton, "Physical Pixels", Master Thesis of MIT,
June, 2000.
[24] D. Hunter and F. G. Lastowka, "Virtual Property",
Presentation at the State of Play Conference, New York Law
School, November, 2003.
[25] H. Ishii and B. Ullmer, "Tangible Bits: Towards
Seamless Interfaces between People, Bits, and Atoms",
Proceedings of CHI’97, 1997, pp. 234-241.
[26] Kaminsky et al., "SWEETPEA: Software Tools for
Programmable Embodied Agents", In: Altom, Mark W.,
Williams, Marian G. (ed.): Proceedings of the ACM CHI 99,
May 15-20, 1999, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, p.144-151.
[27] M. Krueger, "Artificial Reality II", Addison Westley
Eds, 1990.
[28] JP. Labrune, "Tangicam: une Communication Appliance
pour Enfants", Master Thesis of CNAM, Paris, October,
2004.
[29] U. Leonhardt, "Supporting Location-Awareness in Open
Distributed Systems", PhD Thesis, Department of Computer
Science, Imperial College of Science, University of London,
1998.
[30] C. Licoppe, "Chasseurs-Cueilleurs d'aujourd'hui dans un
Japon 'Augmenté': les joueurs de Mogi, l'un des premiers
exemples d'usage collectif de services mobiles géolocalisés", Lettre Usages interne of Groupe FTRD,
November, 2004, pp. 3-5.

[31] M. Lucente, "Visualization Space: A Testbed for
Deviceless Multimodal User Interface", Computer Graphics
(A publication of ACM SIGGRAPH) Volume 31, Number 2,
May 1997.
[32] S. Lundgren and S. Bjork, "Game Mechanics:
Describing Computer-Augmented Games in Terms of
Interaction", Proceedings of TIDSE 03, Darmstadt, Germany,
2003.
[33] L. Manovich, "The Language of New Media", MIT
Press, 2001.
[34] S. Meyer and A. Rakotonirainy, "A Survey of Research
on Context-Aware Homes", Proceedings of the Australasian
information security workshop conference on ACSW
frontiers 2003, Volume 21, 2003, pp.159 – 168.
[35] A. Monk et al., "Funology: Designing Enjoyment",
Extended Abstracts of CHI 02, Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA.,
2002.
[36] W. Munch and K. Furukawa, artistic installation
"Bubbles", available on line:
http://hosting.zkm.de/wmuench/bub/video, 2002.
[37] S. Natkin, "Jeux Vidéo et Médias au XXI siècle",
Edition Vuibert, 2004.
[38] S. Natkin, "Computer games: A Paradigm for the of new
Media and Arts in the XXI century", Proceedings of the
international Conference on Media History and Civilisation,
Game On, 2003.
[39] H. S. Nwana and D. T. Ndumu, "A Perspective on
Software Agents Research", The Knowledge Enginering
Review 14, 1999, available on line:
http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/nwana99perspective.html
[40] G. M. P. O'hare and B. R. Duffy, "Agent Chameleons:
Migration and Mutation within and between Real and Virtual
Spaces", The Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence
and the Simulation of Behaviour AISB 2002, Imperial
College, England, April 2002.
[41] I. Poupyrev, M. Billighust, H. Kato, and R. May,
"Integrating Real and Virtual Worlds in Shared Space",
Invited Talk in Proceedings of 5th International Symposium
on Artificial Life and Robotics (AROB 5th), 2000, pp. 22-25.
[42] M. Relieu, "Quand l'Image Rejoint la Communication:
Téléprésence, Visiophonie et MMS", Lettre Usages interne
of Groupe FTRD, November, 2004, pp. 6-7.
[43] D. Salber, A. K. Dey and G. D. Abowd, "Ubiquitous
Computing: Defining an HCI Research Agenda for an
Emerging Interaction Paradigm", Georgia Tech GVU
Technical Report GIT-GVU-98-01, 1998.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[44] G. Schwabe and C. Goth, "Mobile Learning with a
Mobile Game: Technology and Game Dynamics", University
of Zurich, 2002.
[45] S. Shafer, B. Brumitt, and JJ. Cadiz, "Interaction Issues
in Context-Aware Intelligent Environments", Microsoft
Corporation Research, August, 2000.
[46] J. P. Sousa and D. Garlan, "Aura: An Architectural
Framework for User Mobility in Ubiquitous Computing
Environments", Proceedings of the 3rd Working IEEE/IFIP
Conference on Software Architecture, August, 2002, pp. 2943.
TM

[47] THERE , virtual agora on line:
http://www.there.com/whatIsThere.html
[48] THOLOS System, available on line: http://www.tholossystems.com/
[49] K. Vandroux, "Du Jouet Mécanique au Jouet
Electronique - 150 ans de jouets animés", JOUET MAG! ,
N°14, December, 2001.
[50] M. Weiser, "Some Computer Science Issues in
Ubiquitous Computing", Communications of the ACM Back
to the Real World, Special issue on Computer Augmented
Environments, Vol. 36, No. 7, ACM Press, 1993, pp. 75-84.

