Grand Challenge Award: Interactive Visual Analytics
Palantir: The Future of Analysis
Jason Payne, Jake Solomon, Ravi Sankar, Bob McGrew
100 Hamilton Ave Suite 300 Palo Alto CA 94301
inquiries@palantirtech.com
ABSTRACT
Palantir is a world-class analytic platform used worldwide by
governmental and financial analysts. This paper provides an
introduction to the platform contextualized by its application to
the 2008 IEEE VAST contest. In this challenge, we explored a
notional dataset about a fabricated religious movement,
Catalano’s Paraiso Manifesto Movement.
KEYWORDS: Palantir, VAST 2008, visual analytics, data
visualization, collaboration
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Systems]:
Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces.
1

Information

INTRODUCTION

Today, data is a commodity. Raw data is growing more abundant
and inexpensive every day. Unfortunately, these new datasets are
frequently extremely large and contain only a kernel of significant
information. Some have tried to throw automated processing at
the search for relevance, but computers pale in comparison to
humans at this task. Our goal is to allow analysts to uncover
relevance by asking rich, high-level questions of their data
without having to know languages such as SQL or think like a
computer. From the outset, Palantir was designed with the input of
operators and analysts in the field. Their invaluable feedback has
enabled the creation of a product that allows users to do more
work, in less time, while also providing a higher level of analytic
insight.
2

THE PALANTIR PLATFORM

Palantir is the market-leading analytical platform used in both the
Financial and Government communities. By combining a
powerful backend with an intuitive frontend, Palantir enables
customers to execute complex analytic and investigative missions
with greater speed and fewer resources. Our best-of-breed
application is developed by a team of dedicated Silicon Valley
engineers. Because of the enterprise nature of complex analytical
problems, Palantir is server/client software. Palantir integrates
seamlessly
with
legacy
systems, features numerous
APIs, and uses standard XML
formats for both import and
export.
The Palantir is based on three platforms:
•
Data Platform
•
Application Platform
•
Computer Platform
2.1

Data Platform

The Data Platform’s power derives from its ability to import
raw data (structured and unstructured), as well as ontological or
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

relational semantics, via application programming interfaces
(API’s).
Palantir provides a pluggable Extraction & Transformation
framework so that data from any source can be imported into a
Palantir instance or federated against Integrating various data
resources into a given user’s analytical environment creates the
most sophisticated Data Platform for enterprise-level relational
analysis. Data can be moved into and out of a Palantir instance
using a W3C compliant xml format that is a truly lossless
representation of the Palantir data model. This standardized
format provides a valuable way to allow Palantir data to interact
with any other open file format.
2.2
Application Platform
The Palantir frontend is natively enabled with various applications
(e.g. the Graph) and applications helpers (e.g. the Histogram). In
addition, Palantir provides frontend extensibility points that allow
third parties to build their own applications or embed current tools
directly in the Palantir Platform. Both applications and their
helpers easily integrate with the Application Platform using
Palantir’s extensive Application, Helper, EEWS, and AuthWS
APIs.
2.3
Computer Platform
Computational tasks like sorting, searching, and database
indexing present particular barriers in generating (1) fast and (2)
resource-minimal results. This becomes all the more pertinent
when compute clusters can range from hundreds or thousands of
processors. The Palantir Compute Platform intelligently
distributes and parallelizes tasks to nodes in an Enterprise’s
computing network. This MapReduce-Based, distributed Platform
lets Palantir take advantage of parallel processing, where the
Platform can run on thousands of machine clusters with high
scalability
3

VAST AND PALANTIR: THE ANALYTIC PROCESS

With Palantir, statistical, relational, temporal, geospatial and
Social Network Analyses blend seamlessly within the same
platform.
The first step in analyzing the data from the VAST contest was
to build an ontology to account for the data from the 4 challenges.
Palantir is agnostic to the underlying data though a technology
called the Dynamic Ontology that allows the user to define their
objects, properties, events, and links/relationships. We created
events like Landings and Wiki Edits, entities like Persons and Cell
Towers, and properties like Usernames and Vessel Type. We then
imported the four data sources provided.
Once the data has been imported, the analyst brings some initial
data to the Graph, enabling both relational and social network
analyses. Analysis paths from VAST included known landings of
migrant boats, first and second order cell phone network of a
suspect, or all Wiki edits—whatever information seems like a
logical launching point for the investigation at hand.

201

Lastly, geospatial analysis is enabled by the Palantir data
model. Every property in Palantir has geotime metadata –
time range and geocords. Because of the open architecture of
Palantir, Lat/Long, MGRS, and UTM can be interchanged,
and geospatial data can be exported as Shape or KMZ to any
leading geospatial product.

Figure 1: A silenced communication network

With relevant information on graph, the next step is to use the
Histogram for statistical analysis. For example, we can
quickly determine which users are making the most edits on
Wikipedia, which cell phone IDs are involved in the most
calls, or how many boats are landing during a selected period
of time.

Figure 2: Vessel Type of Mexican Landings

The Timeline enables temporal analysis by graphically
representing a histogram of events over time. It is interactive,
allows us to isolate interesting patterns or to find spikes/lowpoints in activity.

Figure 4: Landings on the Southern tip of Florida

4 CONCLUSION
Palantir is a powerful enterprise investigative platform
enabling analysts to uncover relationships and patterns hidden
within disparate data sources. Our experience with the VAST
2008 competition has reinforced our belief in the need for
analytic platforms, not products. Openness and flexibility are
key to being able to cope with the demands of a broad range
of analytic tasks. In addition to our existing open APIs and
open XML formats, our pluggable architecture enables users
to design custom analysis tools and helpers that will be
seamlessly integrated into the analysts’ workspace, enabling
advanced visualization solutions for increasingly complex
analytical challenges.

Figure 3: Launches, Landings, and Interdictions in the Palantir Timeline

202

