An Information Visualisation System for the Understanding of Web Data
Victor Pascual-Cid∗
Web Research Group
Universitat Pompeu Fabra and Fundacio´ Barcelona Media

A BSTRACT
Internet has become one of the best communication and marketing
tools. Hence, designing well-structured websites with the information or products that users look for is a crucial mission. For this reason, understanding web data is a decisive task to assure the success
of a website. In that sense, data mining techniques provide many
metrics and statistics useful to automatically discover the structure,
contents and usage of a site. This research aims at proving the usefulness of a set of Information Visualisation techniques in order to
analyse web data, using a Visual Web Mining tool that allows the
combination, coordination and exploration of visualisations to get
insight on web data. The tool, named WET, provides a set of visual
metaphors that represent the structure of the websites where web
metrics are overlaid.
Index Terms: H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]: Communications Applications—Information browsers; H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation(I.7)]: User Interfaces—Graphical
user interfaces (GUI), Interaction styles; H.5.4 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Hypertext/Hypermedia—Navigation, User
issues;
1 I NTRODUCTION
The Internet has experienced a big explosion over the last decade.
Because of that, there is a huge interest on designing good websites
to allow the users easily find the information they are seeking, and
help website’s analysts in the decisions taking process.
Thus, in order to improve a site and to satisfy users’ requirements, there is a need to understand and discover the patterns that
lay beneath a website. To fulfil this need there are many Web Analytic tools that present information regarding website’s data. However, the information supplied by these systems is cumbersome to
understand since they usually provide reports full of tables with
large amounts of entries as well as simple charts that do not make
extensive use of Information Visualisation techniques to present
this information. For that reason, visualising web data is one of
the biggest challenges in the InfoVis community [2].
This research aims at proving the usefulness of Information Visualisation techniques in the analysis of web data. To achieve this
goal, a visual tool to support Visual Web Mining is being developed
and further evaluated in order to discover which are the best InfoVis
practices for this purpose.
2 T HE W EBSITE E XPLORATION TOOL
The Website Exploration Tool (WET) (Figure 1) is a visual tool to
support Web Mining. Its main characteristic is its ability to combine
the visualisation of data based on the structure, content and usage
of a website.
WET automatically extracts descriptive hierarchies of a website enabling the visualisation of its structure and users’ navigation along with its contents and usage. To achieve this, a set of
∗ e-mail:

victor.pascual@upf.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 1: A screenshot of WET.

web metrics (e.g. number of hits per page, page rank or landing
pages, among others) [3] can be mapped into the visual attributes
of glyphs that form a representative hierarchical visual metaphor
of the site. In addition, all the available visualisations may be
combined through a linking and brushing system that enhances the
multi-metaphor user experience.
2.1 The Architecture of WET
The architecture of the system is made up of three main modules
(Figure 2):
• The Information Retrieval and Web Mining System (IRWMS): This system uses a crawler to get the structure and
textual content of the target website, and calculates a set of
web metrics from the usage data collected from the webserver
log files and a logging javascript system. This data is finally
stored into a database.
• The Graph’s Logic System (GLS): Representing a very large
graph on a display area is a very complicate task, often not as
useful as simplifying the amount of information to be shown.
Hence, the GLS is capable of extracting representative subgraphs from the whole collected webgraph, simplifying the
quantity of data to be visualised.
• The Visualisation System (VS): A GraphML file is generated
from the output of the IRWM and GLS systems, and used as
input to the VS, which depicts the information and enables the
analysis and exploration of the data.
The VS has been built in order to be completely independent
from the data preparation system, composed by the IRWMS and
the GLS. Hence, the standard input of the VS enables its usage for
other non web-based datasets.
We will avoid the details of the IRWMS as it is a typical system
that retrieves information from a website.
2.2 The Graph’s Logic System
The aim of the GLS is to avoid visualisation as well as computational overloads caused by very large websites. Thus, this system is

183

the root node (the home page). However this algorithm does not
deal with ambiguities such as nodes having more than one parent in
the same level. To solve this problem, we have implemented a modification of the BFS algorithm that selects the parent that provides
more traffic to a node.
2.3.2 Visualisation of website navigation
Visualising the navigation of a website is very important in order to
understand the users behaviour while visiting a website [4]. In that
sense, WET calculates Edmonds algorithm to extract the Maximum
Spanning Tree of the webgraph using the frequency of usage of the
links on the site.
The resulting navigational tree depicts the paths followed by
most of the users from a selected root node to any other page on
the site.
Figure 2: The architecture of WET

able to calculate representative subgraphs from the complete webgraph in order to provide maximum valuable data with the desired
amount of information needed to solve a problem and understand
web data. For instance, the GLS is capable of selecting the nodes
that represent a desired percentage of the visits of a site. With these
nodes, it computes a Spanning Tree (ST) of the webgraph, typically
rooted at the home page of the site, and finally selects the nodes that
are in the minimum path that goes from the root to each of the selected nodes (Figure 2). From this ST, the GLS recalculates the
graph formed by its nodes, and generates the GraphML file.

Figure 3: The GLS selects relevant nodes (in red), and non-relevant
ones needed for the generation of the subgraph

Hence, the information selected by the GLS allows the generation of less overlapped visualisations, reducing also the computational load for its representation.
2.3

The Visualisation System

The VS is in charge of dealing with the input graph that comes
from the GLS and all associated web metrics calculated per node.
It provides several visualisations and interaction techniques that allow the exploration of the data. The VS uses hierarchical visual
metaphors that represent extracted meaningful hierarchies from the
website because visualising the whole webgraph of a website, even
if it is just a subgraph, generates cluttered visualisations. This research aims at testing several hierarchical metaphors, such as the
Radial Tree or the Treemap.
2.3.1

Visualisation of website structure

To visualise the structure of a website, the given subgraph can be
simplified by selecting the structural links and hiding the crossreference ones [1]. To do so, we use a Breadth First Search (BFS)
algorithm which locates each node at the minimum distance from

184

2.3.3 Highlighting System
To provide a maximum insight on the data, and to take advantage
of all the visualisations at the same time, a system has been built in
order to highlight the same information in all the available visualisations.
For instance, this system enables the location of a selected page
in the website structure as well as in the navigational tree. Hence, it
is easy to compare the fastest path needed to reach a page from the
root, and the real path followed by the users.
2.3.4 Metrics Mapping System
This system allows the mapping of the calculated web metrics,
overlaying them on top of the hierarchical visual metaphors used
to visualise the structure and the navigation of the users. Hence,
every web metric can be mapped into one visual attribute, enabling
the visualisation of several metrics at the same time. By now, the
system has implemented four visual attributes: size, colour, shape
and border colour.
2.4 State of the project, conclusions and future work
The first stages of this investigation have been focused on the development of the core of WET, which serves as a container of visual
metaphors and exploratory techniques.
At the current stage, we are evaluating the usability and usefulness of the system by presenting WET to a set of web analytics experts such as webmasters and SEOs, allowing them to explore their
website’s data. Moreover, we are planning to publish the last release
of WET, and to log the behaviour of the users with it. By recording
users actions we will be able to understand which exploratory techniques, visual representations and mappings metric/visual attribute
are more used.
Finally, after several evaluation and reimplementation iterations,
WET will be given to a set of web analysts in order to allow them to
take decisions to enhance their website. After a while, their site will
be again explored and analysed with WET in order to see the differences and the result of the enhancement in order to prove the usefulness of the Information Visualisation techniques implemented.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. A. Botafogo, E. Rivlin, and B. Shneiderman. Structural analysis of
hypertexts: identifying hierarchies and useful metrics. ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst., 10(2):142–180, 1992.
[2] E. H. Chi, J. Pitkow, J. Mackinlay, P. Pirolli, R. Gossweiler, and S. K.
Card. Visualizing the evolution of web ecologies. In CHI ’98: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 400–407, New York, NY, USA, 1998. ACM Press/AddisonWesley Publishing Co.
[3] D. Dhyani, W. K. Ng, and S. S. Bhowmick. A survey of web metrics.
ACM Comput. Surv., 34(4):469–503, 2002.
[4] S. G. Eick. Visualizing online activity. Commun. ACM, 44(8):45–50,
2001.

