Migrant Boat Mini Challenge Award:
Simple and Effective Integrated Display
Geo-Temporal Analysis of Migrant Boats
R. Miklin, T. Lipi´c∗

Z. Konyha†

M. Beri´c‡

W. Freiler, K. Matkovi´c§

D. Graˇcanin¶

Dept. of Telecom.—FER
Univ. of Zagreb, Croatia

VRVis Research
Vienna, Austria

Dept. of Telecom.—FER
Univ. of Zagreb, Croatia

VRVis Research
Vienna, Austria

Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA, USA

A BSTRACT
We provide a description of the tools and techniques used in our
analysis of the VAST 2008 Challenge dealing with mass movement of persons departing Isla Del Sue˜no on boats for the United
States during 2005–2007. We used visual analytics to explore migration patterns, characterize the choice and evolution of landing
sites, characterize the geographical patterns of interdictions and
determine the successful landing rate. Our ComVis tool, in connection with some helper applications and Google Earth, allowed
us to explore geo-temporal characteristics of the data set and answer the challenge questions. The ComVis project file captures the
visual analysis context and facilitates better collaboration among
team members.
Keywords: Visual analytics, geo-temporal data.
Index Terms: I.3.0 [Computer Graphics]: General—; I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques—(Interaction techniques); J.4.1 [Social and Behavioral Sciences]: Sociology—
1

I NTRODUCTION

Visual analysis of geo-temporal data is a navigation in an unfamiliar
space of geographic metadata and a semantic reasoning to support
the seeker in the definition of the search criteria [2]. We describe
the use of ComVis, an interactive visualization tool providing multiple, linked views and composite brushing. ComVis has a number of standard views (histograms, scatter plots and parallel coordinates) while time series data can be displayed in function graph
views [3]. It also provides composite brushes (in the same or in different views) constructed using sequences of AND, OR and SUB
operations. This dynamic filtering is a key feature for interactive
analysis [1]. We also developed a C# application to parse the input
Migrant Data.xml, pre-process data for use in ComVis and to
generate a .kml file to show encounters using Google Earth.
2

DATA S ET C HARACTERISTICS

The data set, the migrant boat records, includes the interdiction
records collected by the United States Coast Guard and information
from other sources about illegal landings on shore. Each record has
several fields, including (x, y) coordinates, date and type (interdiction or landing). We categorized the data in several ways in order
to gain better insight.
∗ e-mail:

r.miklin@gmail.com, tomislav.lipic@fer.hr
konyha@vrvis.at
‡ e-mail: marko.beric@fer.hr
§ e-mail: freiler@vrvis.at, matkovic@vrvis.at
¶ e-mail: gracanin@vt.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

First, we analyzed separately interdictions and successful landings to get an insight where are the actual landing sites and where
the migrants are trying to go. Second, we studied encounter time
data at different time scales (individual encounter, month, quarter,
year) to determine possible trends. and temporal distribution of
landing sites. Third, we used encounter coordinates data to determine a geographical distribution of landing sites. Finally, we
checked launch coordinates and vessel types but that section of the
data set had very limited impact on the overall analysis results.
3

A NALYSIS P ROCEDURES

Due to the geo-temporal nature of the data set, we used Google
Earth to augment the views provided by ComVis (Figure 1). That
allowed us to provide the real-world context for the data set and
made it easier to identify geographical distribution.
3.1

Geo-Temporal Distribution

Since ComVis provides multiple linked views, we used it to quickly
specify (using a composite brush) data categories of interest. Figure 1a) illustrates the use of this feature to provide a geo-temporal
view of the landing sites. Four linked views were used. The first
view (upper left), a histogram of record types, is used for brushing
(selecting the data records of interest — landing sites). Since each
record contains coordinates (x and y), we use a 2D plot view to indicate geographical distribution (lower right view). The selected data
records are shown in red while the other records are shown in grey.
The remaining two views provide temporal distributions using
histograms. The first one (upper right view) provides a finer resolution (quarterly) that indicates seasonal variations in number of landing sites — majority are during spring and summer months. The
second one (lower left view) provides a coarser resolution (yearly)
that indicates the overall trend — a significant increase in number
of landing over the period of three years.
When the landing sites coordinates were viewed in Google Earth
we determined that two countries were affected, United States
(Florida) and Mexico (islands Contoy and Mujeres).
3.2

Composite Brushing

Composite brushing allows us to combine several search criteria
(brushes) to find answer for more specific questions. While Figure 1
provides an overall geographical distribution, we would like to find
out how that distribution depends on the date of the events. Figure 2
shows the landings that occurred in 2005. We first brushed the landing sites (upper left view) and then year 2005 (lower left view). The
remaining two views now show that the landings took place in south
Florida (lower right view) and that the number of landings has been
increasing constantly (upper right view). We can similarly determine that in Year 2 the landings spread to west Florida and Mexico
while in Year 3 most of the landings were in Mexico.

203

a

Figure 2: The original brush of the landing records from Figure 1a
(upper left view) is now combined with another brush, year 2005
records (lower left view), to provide a specific “geographical” distribution (lower right view) and temporal distribution in four quarters of
2005 (upper right view).

b

c

Figure 3: Brushing year 2005 records (upper right view) immediately
provides a distribution between interdictions and landings (upper left
view). The corresponding table view (lower view) allows direct sorting
based on the individual field values.

Figure 1: a) ComVis multiple linked view of the data set. We brush
the landing records (upper left view), provide temporal distribution
at two scales, by quarters (upper right view) and by years (lower
left view) and provide “geographical” distribution (lower right view)
for the landing sites records (red points) while still indicating other
records (grey points). b) Google Earth view of the landing sites providing an enhanced view of the geographical distribution (red points
in a). c) Google Earth view of the non-landing sites (interdiction locations) providing an enhanced view of the geographical distribution
(grey points in a)

3.3

Table View

In some situations we need the raw data records resulting from a
(composite) brush. A raw data view (table view) allows sorting and
filtering based on the individual field values (Figure 3).
3.4

Collaboration

ComVis composite brush feature, combined with information
stored in ComVis project file, facilitates better collaboration among
team mebers. In other words, ComVis lends itself well to off-line
collaboration. While it is (still) a single-user application, it has
ability to capture the state of the visual analysis session (brushes,
views, etc.) and store it (together with the data being analyzed) in a
single project file (.cvv file). Such file provides the collaborators
the common context and framework for visual analysis.

204

For example, a geographical distribution view (Figure 1a) created by one collaborator can be used by other collaborator as a
starting point to create a temporal distribution view in Figure 2 by
refining the initial brush (selection) while the third collaborator is
focusing on the year 2005 data records (Figure 3). ComVis made it
possible for our team members located in Vienna (Austria), Zagreb
(Croatia), and Blacksburg (USA) to better leverage regular communication channels (audio/video conferences, workshops) using the
common visual analysis context captured in .cvv files.
4 C ONCLUSION
We used ComVis, an interactive visualization tool with multiple
linked views and composite brushing, to perform visual analysis of
geo-temporal data. The geographical distribution view was complemented by the corresponding Google Earth view to provide realworld context of the analyzed data set.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information seeking: tight
coupling of dynamic query filters with starfield displays. In CHI ’94:
Conference companion on Human factors in computing systems, pages
313–321, New York, NY, USA, 1994. ACM Press.
[2] R. Albertoni, A. Bertone, and M. D. Martino. Visualization and semantic analysis of geographic metadata. In GIR ’05: Proceedings of the
2005 workshop on Geographic information retrieval, pages 9–16, New
York, NY, USA, Nov. 4 2005. ACM Press.
[3] Z. Konyha, K. Matkovi´c, D. Graˇcanin, M. Jelovi´c, and H. Hauser. Interactive visual analysis of families of function graphs. IEEE Transaction
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(6):1373–1385, 2006.

