A Compound Approach for Interactive Visualization of Time-Oriented Data
Tim Lammarsch∗
Department of Information and Knowledge Engineering (ike), Danube University Krems, Austria

A BSTRACT

Many real-world Visual Analytics applications involve timeoriented data. I am working in a research project related to this challenge where I am responsible for the interactive visualization part.
My goal are interactive visualizations to explore such time-oriented
data according to the user tasks while considering the structure of
time. Time is composed of many granularities that are likely to
have crucial influence on the formation of the data. The challenge
is to integrate the granularities into a detailed compound view on
the data, like the compound eye of insects integrates many images
into one view. Other members of our team are experts in temporal
data mining and user centered design. The goal is to combine our
research topics to an integrated system that helps domain experts to
get more insight from their time-oriented data.
Index Terms:
I.3.6 [Computing Methodologies]: Computer
Graphics—Methodology and Techniques; H.5.m [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces And Presentation (e.g., HCI)—
Miscellaneous
1

R ESEARCH P ROBLEMS

AND

S TATE

OF THE

A RT

Application domains where time-oriented-data occur include commerce, health care, public security, and others. These data are usually multivariate, resulting from heterogeneous data sources. In
many cases, the structure of time has strongly influenced the events
the data results from. The user tasks are complex and involve many
abstract questions. By studying surveys of visualizations for timeoriented data like the one by Aigner [1], it becomes apparent that
most current work at visualizing time-oriented data is focused on
solving one or more of the pressing tasks, but most visualizations
neglect the structure of time. In the following, this structure is discussed, as well as what we consider the most important research
topics in developing interactive visualizations.
1.1

The Structure of Time

Time is fairly different from other data dimensions. It has an inherent structure which results from social as well as natural contexts.
This structure is interwoven to the non-time-oriented aspects of a
time-oriented dataset, creating a complex multi-level system that is
difficult to visualize. Regarding the structure of time, Information
Visualization (InfoVis) experts have to consider a large number of
aspects. These aspects can be classified according to domain, primitives, determinacy, perspectives, and calendars [5]. As humans are
confronted with the structure of time on a daily basis, it is in our
nature to consider it, but at the same time it is difficult to become
aware of it. However, awareness of one’s action is mandatory for
scientific engagement. One aspect that is especially worth exploring is the calendar aspect. In InfoVis, granularity is often considered as nothing more than a parameter of discretization. Temporal
data mining has sparked deep research regarding the interaction of
a vast number of temporal granularities [2]. If these are based on
∗ e-mail:

tim.lammarsch@donau-uni.ac.at

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

a natural context, like the change of seasons, they are usually regular, but granularities based on social context can also be irregular,
e.g., easter time. They play an important role in many datasets from
real-world applications, like customer data from shops.
1.2

Interactive Visualization

User interaction is one of the most important elements of InfoVis, or even the “heart” as Spence states [9]. User interaction is
even more important in Visual Analytics, as studies like the one by
Saraiya et al. [7] shows: users preferred inferior visualizations with
interaction over superior static visualizations. The basic interactions in visualizations of time-oriented data are interval selections,
like zooming and panning, but also others like detail on demand or
brushing. Most interactions are not tailored particularly for timeoriented data. E.g., if a user analyzes a day and wants to see a day
one month later, she often has to go forward 28–31 days, because
the visualization is at day scale. It would be easier to just go forward one month, without having to think about details. If another
user wants to zoom out to one month, he has not only to respect
different month lengths, but also consider that the day viewed before might not be in the center of the month. Still, it is most likely
the user wants to see the month that contains the day, from the first
day to the last day. These examples show that it is important for
interactive visualizations to respect the structure of time.
1.3

The Visualization Process

A widely used visualization process has been described by Card et
al. [3] as Visualization Reference Model. This reference model is
thoughtfully designed to be universally valid for all kinds of interactive visualization. To describe more specific visualization tasks,
it is helpful to adapt it and design a more detailed model for the
visualization process. It is important to give a closer description of
the provisions for the structure of time. E.g., the mapping of values
to visual variables should be separable by granularities, giving the
design a larger degree of flexibility.
2

R ESEARCH Q UESTIONS

How can interactive visualization be used to explore time-oriented
data according to the user tasks while considering the structure of
time?
Which existing visualizations can be used if the structure of time is
important?
How can visualizations emphasize the structure of time itself and
not only capitalize on the data?
Which sub-processes are needed in a visual analytics application or
visualizations that consider the structure of time?
3

M ETHOD

OF

R ESEARCH

We are focusing on the development of visualizations in the context of the structure of time, in conjunction with time-specific user
interactions. We are also compiling a structured collection of prototypical user tasks. For each visualization, the research process
includes searching for ways to integrate the structure of time as
well as user interaction, but also identification of the tasks that are
supported by it. To do this, we have formed a group of experts in
InfoVis, temporal data mining, and user centered design, from the

177

university as well as corporate environment. Work shift scheduling
and demand planning are important tasks in areas like commerce,
health care and security. Our planned development steps are:
1. Finding or developing visualizations that make use of the
structure of time and solve pressing real-world problems;
2. Integrating or improving the user interactions as well as data
mining interactions in these visualizations;
3. Empirically analyzing the visualizations according to the user
tasks;
4. Developing a framework based on the Visualization Reference Model that depicts these steps and implementing it inside
a data management system for time-oriented data.
The effectiveness of interactive visualizations can be improved
much by applying user-centered design. Therefore, other members of our team are accompanying the whole process by doing user
studies. Their results are integrated seamlessly.
4

W ORK P ERFORMED

SO FAR

We have explored existing visualizations that already make use
of the structure of time and assessed ways to improve them. Especially, we have made them more flexible regarding the timeoriented parameters. Here are two examples.
Cycle Plots have been introduced by Cleveland [4]. They inherently make use of the structure of time. Their main purpose is
the detection of trends along a coarser granularity in cases where
there are bigger differences between the granules of a finer granularity. We have successfully used them with different combinations
of granularities.
Multi-Scale Plots have been developed by Shimabukuro et al.
[8] in a work mainly focused on the combination of time-oriented
and space-oriented data as a way to combine overview with detail in one visualization. The visualization makes strong use of the
structure of time, allowing the combination of four granularities and
their data content.
Our implementation is done as a web browser based application.
Therefore, we have also researched platforms for interactive visualizations in that domain [6].
5

N EXT W ORKING S TEPS

After assessing several visualizations for univariate time-oriented
data we now want to expand our field of research to multivariate data. A big challenge is that visualizations usually need space
and/or visual variables to show time itself. Showing the structure of
time increases this need. Therefore, less space and visual variables
are available for the data. Furthermore, multiple, but connected,
datasets might be given at different granularities. There might also
be a temporal shift between instances which are connected. A possible reason is that one is the cause for the other one. An increase
in people counted at the entrance of a shop is likely, but not compulsory, to cause an increase in people counted at the checkout. We
also want to integrate more user interaction. Some ideas:
• By selecting a specific granule (e.g., a day) in a multi-scale
plot, the user could switch the view: instead of showing absolute values for the other granules, the differences to the selected one could be shown.
• Almost every interactive visualization can be improved with
zooming and panning features. For time-oriented data, panning can almost always be considered and implemented as
switching of granules while zooming can be considered and
implemented as switching of granularities.
Another area we want to stress is the integration of data mining and interactive visualization. Some progress we have made in
the area of data mining are currently in need of suitable visualizations. Other visualization ideas or improvements only work with
data mining behind them:

178

• Our current implementation of multi-scale plots maps average values directly to color. It is better to use a classification
similar to the one described by van Wijk and van Selow [10].
• Instead of grouping by a granularity in a cycle plot, it is possible to use a classification algorithm. The classes we have
produced yet can also be regarded as complex granularities.
6

C ONCLUSION

Many real-world applications of Visual Analytics involve timeoriented data. Current methods for temporal data mining and interactive visualizations cannot deal with all user tasks involved in
the analysis of this data. Particulary, they often cannot deal with
complex or abstract tasks that involve several questions at once. We
have explored the state of the art and realized that there is insufficient support for the structure of time, especially the combination
of several granularities to a compound view on the data. Becoming
aware of the structure of time is a very promising base to improve
interactive visualizations and create new ones. Several visualizations can be improved by incorporating the structure of time. The
combination of different visualization techniques is also a viable
field of research. We have laid out a way to deal with these issues
and generate scientific progress that will spark research in these areas. By using a specialized variant of the Visualization Reference
Model, we intend to classify at which parts of the visualization process specific parts of our work will be applicable.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I wish to thank all partners of the DisCo¯ project which is supported
by the program “FIT-IT Visual Computing” of the Federal Ministry
of Transport, Innovation and Technology, Austria. (No. 813388)
R EFERENCES

[1] W. Aigner. Visualization of Time and Time-Oriented Information: Challenges and Conceptual Design. Theses, Vienna
University of Technology, Feb. 2006.
[2] C. Bettini, S. Jajodia, and S. Wang. Time Granularities in
Databases, Data Mining and Temporal Reasoning. SpringerVerlag New York, Secaucus, NJ, USA, 2000.
[3] S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 1999.
[4] W. Cleveland. Visualizing Data. Hobart Press, Summit, NJ,
USA, 1993.
¨
[5] I. A. Goralwalla, M. T. Ozsu,
and D. Szafron. An ObjectOriented Framework for Temporal Data Models, pages 1–35.
Springer, 1998.
[6] T. Lammarsch, W. Aigner, A. Bertone, J. G¨artner, S. Miksch,
and T. Turic. A Comparison of Programming Platforms for
Interactive Visualization in Web Browser Based Applications.
In Proceedings of 12th International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV08), July 2008. forthcoming.
[7] P. Saraiya, C. North, V. Lam, and K. Duca. An Insight-Based
Longitudinal Study of Visual Analytics. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(6):1, 2006.
[8] M. Shimabukuro, E. Flores, M. de Oliveira, and H. Levkowitz. Coordinated Views to Assist Exploration of SpatioTemporal Data: A Case Study. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization (CMV04), pages 107–117. IEEE,
July 13 2004.
[9] R. Spence. Information Visualization: Design for Interaction.
Prentice-Hall, Inc. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2007.
[10] J. J. van Wijk and E. R. van Selow. Cluster and Calendar
Based Visualization of Time Series Data. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 1999 (InfoVis99), pages 4–9, 1999.

