Visual Analysis for Mutual Fund Performance
Ye Zhao1

Jamal Alsakran

Xinlei Zhao

Kent State University
ABSTRACT

3

Mutual funds are one of the most important investment
instruments available. However, choosing among mutual funds is
not an easy task because they vary in many different dimensions,
such as asset size, turnover and fee structure, and these
characteristics may affect fund returns. It is thus important to
understand the relation between fund performance and these
properties. In this work, we use a new visual analytical tool, the
density-based distribution map, to assist in this task. By
visualizing various important fund characteristics from a realworld database of the US stock funds, our new visual
representations greatly help understand the relation between fund
characteristics and returns.

We provide a brief description of mutual fund properties in this
section. The characteristics we examine in this work are: total
asset size, cash holding, and turnover ratios.
The total size of a mutual fund is usually called the net asset
value; it is the current market value of a fund’s holdings less the
fund’s liabilities. Cash holding is the percentage of fund asset in
the form of cash. Turnover is a measure of the fund’s transactions
and is usually calculated over a year’s period and as a percentage
of net asset value.
Financial economists usually employ the ordinary-least-squares
(OLS) regression technique to examine the relation between these
characteristics and the return of mutual funds [4]. The standard
multiple linear regression model assumes a linear relation between
the explanatory variables and the dependent variable:
y = Xβ
(1)
where y is the dependent variable (returns of the fund in our
case), and X is the explanatory variable (fund characteristics and
the intercept in our case). β is the vector of regression
coefficients. This OLS method is not a perfect method for
massive, complex mutual fund data, due to its simplicity and
linear assumption. Thus, we use visual analytics tool to help
financial experts to perform more in-depth and intuitive analysis.

KEYWORDS: Financial Data Visualization, Mutual Funds,
Distribution Map, Decision Making, Regression Analysis.
INDEX TERMS: H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human
Information Processing—Visualization; H.4.2 [Information
Systems Applications]: Types of Systems—Decision Support
1

INTRODUCTION

Mutual fund allows a group of investors to pool their money
together and invest [1]. They provide many benefits to investors.
First of all, it is very difficult for an investor with only $1000 to
invest in a diversified basket of market instruments. But any small
investor can easily achieve a diversified portfolio by investing in a
diversified mutual fund(s). Second, unlike the underlying assets
that may have limited liquidity in the market, mutual funds can be
very easily traded. However, there is a wide variation in mutual
fund characteristics as well as they have different fee structure.
In this work, we propose a new visual tool, density-based
distribution map, to depict massive mutual fund information on
screens with limited size and resolution. We use a real world fund
database (U.S. stock fund data during the year 2006). For
comparison purpose, we also plot the fitted line from OLS on the
same map. Uneven and weighted distribution map are also
proposed to further utilize the area in the plotting domain.
2

4

MUTUAL FUNDS CHARACTERISTCS AND ANALYSIS

DENSITY-BASED FUND DISTRIBUTION MAP

4.1
Density Grid Method
Ordinary visual presentations cannot represent the thousands of
mutual funds from the real-world database on the limited drawing
domain on the screen. We propose a new density-based
distribution map by introducing a density grid to record the
number of funds whose characteristic-and-return values fall into
specified ranges. We divide the 2D plotting domain into a regular
grid G, which has the axis of one characteristic C representing the
values from C[0] = min(C) to C[M−1] = max(C), and the axis of
the return R representing the values from R[0] = min(R) to R[N
−1] = max(R). This partition is controlled by resolutions M and N
for the two axes, respectively.

RELATED WORK

Visual analytical techniques have been introduced to represent
massive, dynamic and complicated data with various visual
elements. A good survey was recently given for the scope and
challenge of this emerging research field [2]. Keim et al. [3] used
Growth Matrix to facilitate analysis of subinterval return rates
among groups of assets. Most of these endeavors focus on
financial time series data of asset performance.
1

{zhao, jalsakra}@cs.kent.edu
xzhao@kent.edu

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Distribution map with different resolutions.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 1 is the distribution maps of plotting return values against
cash values with different resolutions. Figure 3a is the result using
M = N = 150 and Figure 3b uses M = N = 60. The purple lines on

181

the Figures are the OLS regression result.
4.2
Weighted Distribution Map
Evenly distributed map wastes the valuable visualization domain
as blank spaces. Even when the resolution is decreased from
Figure 1a to Figure 1b, this problem persists. To fully utilize the
information and resources here, we extend the regular densitybased distribution map to a weighted distribution map.
The size of a quad on the map represents the fund density of a
cell, together with the color. This weighted visualization
algorithm utilizes most space of the plotting area. Meanwhile, the
regression fitted line should also be plotted with these weights,
and as a result, the fitted line becomes a curve on the map. We use
an incremental method for plotting the regression curve. We draw
a line segment between two consecutive vertices on the regression
curve step by step. The basic algorithm is:
Compute c0 from return r0 using regression (Equation 1);
Initialize LastVertex =CurVertex = (c0, r0);
Initialize current characteristic value c = c0;
Initialize a counter of columns i = 0;
While (i < the width of the plotted domain) {
c = c+quad_widthi;
Compute the new r from c by OLS regression;
Assign the new CurVertex = (c, r);
Draw a line segment from LastVertex to CurVertex;
LastVertex =CurVertex;
i++; }
Figure 2 shows the weighted distribution maps for different
resolutions, with the same parameters as in Figure 1.

5.2
Return against Cash Holdings
The insight from Figures 4 is that it is important for funds to have
some liquidity in the form of cash, but high cash holding hurts
fund returns. On the other hand, it is also important to have some
cash to meet redemption request and have flexibility.

(a) Unweighted

(b) Weighted

Figure 4: Returns against cash holding

5.3
Return against Turnover
Figure 5 suggests a general downward relation between returns
and turnovers, which agrees with the regression output. Even
though there are a few funds with high returns and low turnovers.

(a) Unweighted

(b) Weighted

Figure 5: Returns against Turnover

6

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Weighted distribution map with different resolutions.

5

VISUAL ANALYSIS OF MUTUAL FUNDS

We now plot returns against the fund characteristics in Figures 3
to 5. We use regular map and weighted map to do the analysis.
5.1
Return against Asset Size
Figure 3 suggests that the majority of funds are small; also, the
maximum returns are higher among smaller-sized fund.

The relation between mutual fund performance and fund
characteristics is of much interest to financial market practitioners
and investors. In this study, we use the density-based distribution
map visualization techniques to examine the relation between
fund returns and some characteristics. We found the technique
very useful for analyzing mutual fund performance and received
positive feedback from financial experts. The promising results
that we have gotten encourage us to apply our visualization tool in
the broader field of finance and explore the performance in similar
areas of interest.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

Figure 3: Returns against fund asset size.

182

CONCLUSION

[4]

W. G. Droms and D. A. Walker. Mutual fund investment
performance. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance,
36(3):347–363, September 1996.
D. A. Keim, F. Mansmann, J. Schneidewind, J. Thomas, and H.
Ziegler. Visual analytics: Scope and challenges. Lecture Notes,
2008.
D. A. Keim, T. Nietzschmann, N. Schelwies1, J. Schneidewind, T.
Schreck, and H. Ziegler. A spectral visualization system for
analyzing financial time series data. Proceedings of the
Eurographics/IEEEVGTC Symposium on Visualization, pages 8–10,
2006.
J. Fox. Applied Regression Analysis, Linear Models, and Related
Methods. Sage Publications, Inc, 1997.

