Envisioning User Models for Adaptive Visualization
Jae-wook Ahn and Peter Brusilovsky

*

School of Information Sciences, University of Pittsburgh

ABSTRACT
Adaptive search systems apply user models to provide better
separation of relevant and non-relevant documents in a list of
results. This paper presents our attempt to leverage this ability of
user models in the context of visual information analysis. We
developed an adaptive visualization approach for presentation and
exploration of search results. We simulated a visual intelligence
search/analysis scenario with log data extracted from an adaptive
information foraging study and were able to verify that our
method can improve the ability of traditional relevance
visualization to separate relevant and irrelevant information.
KEYWORDS: Visualization, VIBE, User model, Query,
Personalized Search.

INDEX TERMS: H.3.1 [Content Analysis and Indexing]: Indexing
method; H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
filtering; Relevance feedback; H.3.5 [Online Information
Services]: Web-based services; H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Graphical
user interfaces (GUI).
1

ability to separate relevant and non-relevant documents could
provide substantial assistance in an information visualization
context. In this paper we briefly present our adaptive visualization
technology and the evaluation result.
2

VISUALIZING USER MODEL
FRAMEWORK

AND

USER QUERY

USING

VIBE

In personalized search systems, three important elements compose
the whole framework: query, user model, and the ranked list. The
users themselves provide the queries, and the system constructs
their user models by observing their actions. Among various
approaches, content-based user models are composed of important
keywords extracted during the user interactions and can represent
user interests. The system can return personalized search results
with these two input variables.

INTRODUCTION

User modelling is a technique to support adaptive information
access by supplementing non-adaptive information access systems
with information about its users. Over the last 20 years, user
models have become very popular in the area of information
access systems [3]. Most recently, personalized Web search
systems [4] emerged as the most active area of research in user
modelling and personalization.
What makes user models attractive in a Web search context is
their ability to separate relevant and non-relevant documents
according to user information needs. Observing user actions over
time (e.g., queries issued, documents selected and explored, links
traversed) a personalized search system attempts to capture user
long-term interests at the task level and to represent it in the user
model. The personal difference or task context can then be applied
to the information provided by the systems.
Unlike text-based personalized search systems that implement
personalization by pulling relevant documents to the top of the
ranked lists, spatial visualization approaches expand the onedimensional information space to 2- or 3- dimensional
representations of retrieved results, appealing to human
intelligence and human ability to analyze visual information. We
have tried to combine the ideas of user modelling and
visualization to develop a “best of both worlds” approach for
assisting human users, especially intelligence analysts, in their
search process. We explored a promising technology that applies
user modelling in the context of spatial relevance visualization.
While this technology was originally built to support mediation
between user queries and user models in intelligence analysis
systems [1], our pilot studies demonstrated that the user model’s

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 1: Adaptive VIBE Visualization (in Hemisphere layout)

Figure 2: Adaptive VIBE Visualization (in Parallel layout)
The simulation result shows a separation of relevant and nonrelevant information painted in green and red squares respectively

We tried to visualize these three elements using an application
named VIBE (Visual Information Browsing Environment) that
was originally developed by Olsen et al. [5]. We extended it to
implement an adaptive information access on top of the original
framework. VIBE is a reference point – called POI (Point of
Interest) – based spatial visualization system. The entities to be

175

visualized are allocated on a 2-dimensional space, and their
locations are determined by the similarity ratios to the POIs. For
example, if the similarity values of an entity between POIa and
POIb are 0.8 and 0.4, then the entity is placed in a position two
times closer to POIa than POIb because the similarity ratio is 2:1.
Therefore, entities are placed closer to the more similar POIs on
the screen. Users can drag the POIs interactively, and the entity
positions are updated on the fly following related POIs.
We defined two types of POIs: query POIs and user model
POIs. Query POIs are simply query terms that were entered by
users. User model POIs are the top N most important terms from
the user model. The locations of the documents are decided by
their similarity ratios to the POIs. Because the documents can be
represented as term vectors (bag of words approach) [6], the
similarity values between the documents and the POIs (query
terms or user model terms) can be easily calculated using standard
similarity measures, such as cosine coefficient.
Figure 1 shows an example of this visualization. Two query
terms (CONVICT and PARDON painted in yellow) and the five
most important user model terms (YEAR, POPE, ESPIONAGE,
PRISON, and RUSSIA painted in blue) are displayed as POIs.
Squares represent retrieved documents and are aligned according
to their similarities to the query terms and the user model terms.
For example, the squares distributed closer to PARDON represent
the documents that are more related to the query than the user
model and are more related to PARDON among two query terms.
Unlike the original VIBE that aligned the POIs on a circle by
default, we added two new default layouts: Hemisphere and
Parallel. Figure 1 shows the Hemisphere layout and Figure 2
shows the Parallel. This new idea was motivated by the fact that
we have two different group of POIs – query and user model POIs
– and need a means to visually separate them in the information
space.
3

SIMULATING ADAPTIVE VISUALIZATION WITH REAL DATA

In order to test the effectiveness of the proposed adaptive
visualization approach, we extracted log data from our previous
study called TaskSieve [2], which is a personalized search system
based on a simple textual interface, and simulated the
visualization with the data using the adaptive VIBE framework.
We extracted three important categories of data from the log:
queries, user models, and the documents returned by the system.
We adopted a special type of user model for this study, which is
called a task model. It is equivalent to the conventional user
models in that it reflects user interests, but is more focused on
specific tasks. The subjects from the TaskSieve study were asked
to solve a specific task by entering queries, retrieve documents,
and save important textual passages they found using the
personalized search system. The system automatically extracts
important terms from the user-selected passages and constructs a
user model. Therefore, a user model consists of a set of terms.
Each user model term is weighted according to its importance
(frequency). Using the user query and the user model constructed
in this way, the system provides personalized search results to the
subjects.
We extracted 105 transaction records from the log data and fed
them into the proposed visualization framework as shown in
Figure 2. One important visual cue in this figure is the color of
documents (squares). By matching the topics the subjects were
asked to work on and the ground-truth data manually tagged by
humans beforehand, we were also able to mark each document as
“relevant” or “not relevant”. Therefore, the document color
represents this relevance information (green = relevant, red = nonrelevant). The relevance information was never visible to the
subjects during the previous study but was added later to the
simulation for the authors to observe the effect of the user model.

176

4

THE USER MODEL EFFECT TO VISUALIZATION

As shown in the simulation example (Figure 2), we can easily
observe that there is a separation between green and red squares,
i.e., relevant and non-relevant documents to the corresponding
topic. This effect of separation was observed from many of the
simulation results among the 105 log records. In order to
investigate this separation numerically, we calculated the
centroids (marked as green or red circles in Figure 2) of the
relevant and non-relevant document clusters and then compared
their horizontal positions. The centroid positions were achieved
by averaging the document positions within the corresponding
clusters. The reason why we compared the horizontal positions,
but not the vertical, was that the query and user model POIs were
separated horizontally. Table 1 shows the result. The average
horizontal positions of the relevant and non-relevant document
clusters were presented in pixels on a Java Swing plane where the
origin (x = 0, y = 0) is the left topmost position. The average
positions of the relevant document cluster centroids were greater
than the non-relevant document clusters for all three layouts,
suggesting that the relevant documents are positioned closer to the
user model. The differences were all statistically significant
(paired Wilcox signed rank test) and the separation was greatest
with the Parallel layout.
Table 1: Comparison of Cluster Centroid Positions

POI Layout
Relevant
Non-relevant
Difference
(Relevant – Nonrelevant)
5

Circular

Parallel

Hemisphere

304.3
283.9

300.9
207.96

337.7
295.3

20.4
(p < 0.01)

92.94
(p < 0.01)

42.40
(p < 0.01)

CONCLUSIONS

In this study, we proposed an adaptive visualization framework by
using an extended version of VIBE. The simulation of the
proposed framework using the log data extracted from a
personalized search system suggests that our adaptive
visualization framework can spatially separate relevant and nonrelevant information. This separation will be able to help users
analyze and filter huge volumes of information.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

J. Ahn and P. Brusilovsky, "From user query to user model and
back: Adaptive relevance-based visualization for information
foraging," in Web Intelligence, IEEE/WIC/ACM International
Conference on, 2007, pp. 706-712.
J. Ahn, P. Brusilovsky, D. He, J. Grady, and Q. Li, "Personalized
web exploration with task models," in WWW '08: Proceedings of the
17th international conference on World Wide Web.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM Press, 2008.
S. Gauch, M. Speretta, A. Chandramouli and A. Micarelli, User
profiles for personalized information access. in: The Adaptive Web:
Methods and Strategies of Web Personalization, P. Brusilovsky, A.
Kobsa and W. Neidl, eds., Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4321,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2007, pp.54-89.
A. Micarelli and F. Sciarrone, Anatomy and empirical evaluation of
an adaptive Web-based information filtering system. User Modeling
and User Adapted Interaction, 14(159-200) (2004).
K. A. Olsen, R. R. Korfhage, K. M. Sochats, M. B. Spring, and J. G.
Williams, "Visualization of a document collection: the vibe system,"
Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 69-81, 1993.
G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. S. Yang, "A vector space model for
automatic indexing," Commun. ACM, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 613-620,
November 1975.

