Visual Sentiment Analysis on Twitter Data Streams
Ming Hao, Christian Rohrdantz*, Halldór Janetzko*, Umeshwar Dayal
Daniel A. Keim*, Lars-Erik Haug, Mei-Chun Hsu
Hewlett-Packard Labs and *University of Konstanz

Figure 1. A pipeline for visual analytics of live twitter data streams

ABSTRACT
Twitter currently receives about 190 million tweets (small textbased Web posts) a day, in which people share their comments
regarding a wide range of topics. A large number of tweets
include opinions about products and services. However, with
Twitter being a relatively new phenomenon, these tweets are
underutilized as a source for evaluating customer sentiment. To
explore high-volume twitter data, we introduce three novel timebased visual sentiment analysis techniques: (1) topic-based
sentiment analysis that extracts, maps, and measures customer
opinions; (2) stream analysis that identifies interesting tweets
based on their density, negativity, and influence characteristics;
and (3) pixel cell-based sentiment calendars and high density geo
maps that visualize large volumes of data in a single view. We
applied these techniques to a variety of twitter data, (e.g., movies,
amusement parks, and hotels) to show their distribution and
patterns, and to identify influential opinions.
Keywords: Visual Opinion Analysis, Sentiment Analysis, Twitter
Analysis, Topic Extraction.
Index Terms: I.7.5 [Document and Text Processing]: Document
Capture - Document Analysis; I.5.2 [Pattern Recognition]: Design
Methodology - Feature evaluation and selection.

1

INTRODUCTION
IEEE
Symposium
Visual
Science
Technology
With
the rapid on
growth
ofAnalytics
social media,
theand
amount
of customer
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
feedback
available
to
corporations,
business
owners,
and IT
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

services managers interested in obtaining customer input is greater
than ever. Figure 1 shows comments on the movie Kung-Fu
Panda on Twitter. During the five days from 5/26 to 5/30, there
were 59,614 tweets related to this movie. The total volume of
twitter comments was much larger than that of normal reviews on
the web site. The tweets came in by the minute in contrast to
normal web reviews that come in on a daily basis. However, the
language of the tweets is more casual than that of web reviews,
and twitters comments were much shorter (maximum 140
characters) and contained more abbreviations. The enormous size
of the data stream, the diversity of the comments, and the uneven
distribution of opinions over time make the analysis of twitter data
very challenging.

2

OUR APPROACH

In this poster, we present an approach to exploring twitter data,
as shown in Figure 1. Our approach attempts to automatically
analyze large volumes of twitter comments with respect to what
was commented on positively or negatively. To achieve our goal,
we developed a novel topic-based text stream analysis technique
that automatically detects which attributes were frequently
commented on in tweets, based on their density distribution,
negativity, and influence characteristics. Furthermore, we present
two novel visualization techniques that help analysts explore the
data in different ways from the previous methods using tag-cloud
and radial visualization [3].

277

2.1

Sentiment Analysis

Using natural language processing techniques [1], we determine
topics, extract attributes of the topics, detect opinions about the
attributes, and measure the sentiment value as shown in Figure 2.

2.3.2

Pixel Sentiment Geo Map

The pixel sentiment geo map allows the visualization of large
amounts of data fitting entirely into the display window without
overlap [2]. The basic idea is to enable the user to optimize the
degree of overlap and distortion to generate the best possible view
as shown in Figure 1. Overlap often causes the loss of important
information. Figure 4 is a visual representation of the map with
the data-induced, high degree of overlap. Figure 5 shows each
single tweet as one pixel without any overlap. However, the pixel
geo map in Figure 1 shows the better geographical distribution of
tweets. Figure 5 reveals dense areas, from which a large volume
of reviews was posted on Twitter. The reviews with the same
positions are placed around the original position based on their
sentiment value. For example, the red border around the circular
area represents negative tweets which have the same positions as
the positive tweets (green) in the center of a circular area. Users
are able to navigate through the dense areas for further analysis.

Figure 2. Methods to extract attributes and to measure values

2.2

Stream Analysis

To analyze large live data streams, three key factors need to be
considered:
1. Density distribution: Do the tweets arrive together? Are they
from different locations or from very close by locations
geographically?
2. Negativity: Do the tweets have the same negative opinion?
3. Influence: What are the characteristics of an influential
review? How many followers does it have? And from where?

2.3

Figure 4. Sentiment geo map with high degree of overlap

Visual Analytics

To enable a more powerful exploration of the Twitter feeds, we
combine the automated sentiment analysis with the following
interactive visual analytics techniques:

2.3.1

Pixel Sentiment Calendar

Figure 1 top right shows a pixel cell-based sentiment calendar
arranged in a row (topic) and column (time interval, i.e., hours)
format. Each opinion is represented by a cell. The cell color is the
sentiment value (green: positive, gray: neutral, red: negative).
Cells are arranged from bottom left to top right and ordered
according to the input time. Analysts can quickly grasp the
distribution of customer feedback on specific features over time.
As illustrated in Figure 3, many negative reviews are often
influenced by the comment given by a celebrity, in this case
Conan O’Brien.

Figure 5. Pixel Sentiment geo map without overlap

3

In this poster, we presented a visual analysis of Twitter timeseries, which combines sentiment and stream analysis with geoand time-based interactive visualizations for the exploration of
real-world Twitter data streams. In addition to applying the above
visual sentiment techniques to movie tweets, we have successfully
applied them to post purchase web survey data and amusement
park Twitter data identifying interesting patterns of customer
feedback.. Today’s visual analysis tools (e.g., SAS JMP,
Vivisimo, Polyanalyst, etc.) mainly provide feedback on reviews
using yes/no questions, numeric ratings, and direct comments.
Our future work will incorporate information about opinion
associations to find related features and visualize them
appropriately.
[1]
[2]

Figure 3. Pixel Sentiment Calendar

278

CONCLUSION

[3]

D. Oelke, et. al., Visual opinion analysis of customer feedback data.
VAST, 2009.
Keim, D. A., Hao, M. C. Dayal, U., Janetzko, H., and Bak, P.,
Generalized Scatter Plots.
Information Visualization Journal
(IVS09),
Wu, Yingcai, et al., OpinionSeer: Interactive Visualization of Hotel
Customer Feedback. IEEE InfoVis2010.

