Mapping an Epidemic Outbreak: Effective Analysis and Presentation
VAST 2011 Mini Challenge 1 Award: “Informative Use of Statistics and Evidence in Debrief”
Kevin Boone and Edward Swing
Vision Systems & Technology, Inc., a SAS Company

ABSTRACT
The microblog challenge presented an opportunity to use
commercial software for visual analysis. An epidemic outbreak
occurred in the city of Vastopolis, requiring visualizations of
symptoms and their spread over time. Using these tools, analysts
could successfully identify the outbreak’s origin and pattern of
dispersion. The maps used to analyze the data and present the
results provided clear, easily understood representations, and
presented a logical explanation of a complex progression of
events.
KEYWORDS: Spatial Analysis, Information Visualization, ArcGIS.
INDEX TERMS: H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database
Applications—Spatial Databases and GIS; I.3.6 [Computer
Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques—Interaction Techniques
1

INTRODUCTION

The microblog/epidemic challenge provided a dataset of
microblog entries covering a three week period in the fictional
area of Vastopolis. Many records in the dataset contained
comments that indicated someone was sick. Additional data
included a map of Vastopolis, daily weather information, and
population statistics for each of the area’s thirteen zones.
The analyst needed to review the microblog data to determine if
an epidemic outbreak had occurred, and determine where the
outbreak originated and whether it was contained. SAS Base 9.2
(SAS Institute) and ArcGIS 10 (Esri) software were used for the
analysis.
SAS prepared the data for use in the GIS by parsing latitude and
longitude values into separate columns and applying negative
values to longitude coordinates. Analysts also used it to create a
subset of records that indicated sickness, including the specific
symptom(s).
The analyst first applied ArcGIS to geo-reference the provided
map to latitude and longitude coordinates, and to create datasets
of roads, Vastopolis zones, water bodies, and points of interest.
After completing the data preparation, the new time visualization
tools in ArcGIS [1] provided a presentation of the microblog data
as an overlay on the provided map in order to allow analysis over
time and space.
2

THEORY

The task was approached from the perspective that a visualization
of symptoms over time would reveal a pattern of dispersion. This
technique would possibly also illustrate the origin area (“ground
zero”) and identify a causal event at that location. The analyst

believed that the challenge would be answered by logical
application of both sensible cartographic symbolization and
spatiotemporal visualization while using well-known software.
3

DISCUSSION

Using ArcGIS, the analyst color-coded the data containing reports
of sickness by symptom, and overlaid this data on the map of
Vastopolis. This led to the realization that outbreaks of two
different symptoms occurred: stomach problems and flu-like
issues, which caused the analyst to view each outbreak
individually. Note that the illustrations here show the maps and
data just as they were seen by the analyst for interactive
visualization.
3.1
Data Filtering
The analyst applied filtering to the dataset of reported sickness,
such that only stomach problems appeared on the map. This
quickly made it evident that those issues were concentrated in the
southwest of Vastopolis, as illustrated in Figure 1. In fact, nearly
98% of all reported stomach problems occurred in that area. The
filtered view also highlighted that the reports were downstream of
the I-610 bridge over the Vast River.
Temporal visualization revealed that stomach issues were
sparse until May 19, after which there were numerous reports
focused in the southwest.

Figure 1. Reported stomach problems mostly in southwest

3.2
Temporal Visualization of Flu-like Symptoms
The origin area and dispersion of the flu-like symptoms required
temporal analysis with high detail. After determining that the
symptoms broke out at epidemic levels over the last three days of
the dataset, the analyst visualized the data in six hour time frames
over those three days using the “time slider” tool in ArcGIS.
Figures 2 and 3 illustrate a sample of the analyst’s view of those
six hour windows, while Figure 4 shows the time slider tool with
settings that produced Figure 3.

Kevin.Boone@vsticorp.com, Ed.Swing@vsticorp.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

307

Figure 2. Flu symptoms on May 18, 6:00am – 12:00pm

3.4
Presentation of Results
Interim and final reports are typical outputs of an analysis project.
Since the work was performed directly on maps and utilized good
symbolization, preparation of illustrations for reports was simple.
Whenever the analyst discovered a critical point, he could export
the image from ArcGIS, which created a pool of maps for use
when reports were written. Likewise, the analyst could revisit the
map and easily create any additional needed images. Logical
progression of the documents was simple when any maps required
to “tell the story” were readily available.
4

Figure 3. Flu symptoms on May 19, 12:00pm – 6:00pm

Figure 4. Time slider tool

This revealed that the flu-like symptoms were concentrated in
the downtown (center) area and significantly spreading to the east.
Notably, the focal area is east of the I-610 bridge, and winds blew
primarily from the west on those three days.
3.3
Determination of “Ground Zero”
Since both sets of symptoms originated near the I-610 bridge over
the Vast River, the analyst reviewed all of the microblog
messages for references to “610”. This revealed approximately
140 messages that mentioned a truck accident on the bridge on
May 17. According to the reports, the accident caused a fire and
closed the bridge for over ten hours. The analyst determined that
this event caused the outbreaks. Chemicals or toxins spilled into
the river and caused stomachaches downstream, and the fire
caused germs to blow eastward with the prevailing winds. Figure
5 shows the accident reports in yellow, the bridge location as a
pink star, and outbreak areas in green.

Figure 5. View of “ground zero,” zoomed in for detail

308

CONCLUSION

Logical application of widely-available tools that are relatively
easy to use was the key to solving the challenge and clearly
presenting the outcome. Visual analysis quickly and accurately
determined the spread of various symptoms, and the source event
that caused the epidemic. This shows that the benefits of visual
analysis are strong enough to be included in commercial software
with very good results.
“A picture is worth a thousand words” is a well-known adage,
and very applicable to this challenge. When maps include one or
two key analytic features, they enable quick understanding, and
reveal a lot about an event or location at the time. This applies
whether interactively working with the maps or viewing them in a
report. Furthermore, a time series of maps can offer even greater
understanding of an event rapidly, increasing their worth. In
situations such as this epidemic, they can help to save lives by
enabling responders to efficiently direct resources to the most
needed locations.
5

FURTHER VIEWING

The original debrief submission, which includes larger maps and a
video presentation of the analytic process, can be seen at
www.vsticorp.com/vast/spatiotemporal
REFERENCES
[1]

Suzanne Borden. “Mapping Time in ArcGIS 10”. Sept. 8 2010.
http://blogs.esri.com/Support/blogs/esritrainingmatters/archive/2010/
09/08/mapping-time-in-arcgis-10.aspx

