Keynote Speaker
Quantitative Visualization in the Computational Biological Sciences
Chandrajit Bajaj
University of Texas at Austin, USA

Abstract

Bio

Discoveries in computational molecular – cell biology and
bioinformatics promise to provide new therapeutic interventions to disease. With the rapid growth of sequence and
structural information for thousands of proteins and hundreds of cell types, computational processing are a restricting
factor in obtaining quantitative understanding of molecularcellular function. Processing and analysis is necessary both
for input data (often from imaging) and simulation results.
To make biological conclusions, this data must be input to
and combined with results from computational analysis and
simulations. Furthermore, as parallelism is increasingly
prevalent, utilizing the available processing power is essential to development of scalable solutions needed for realistic scientific inquiry. However, complex image processing
and even simulations performed on large clusters, multicore CPU, GPU-type parallelization means that naïve cache
unaware algorithms may not efficiently utilize available
hardware. Future gains thus require improvements to a core
suite of algorithms underpinning the data processing, simulation, optimization and visualization needed for scientific
discovery. In this talk, I shall highlight current progress on
these algorithms as well as provide several challenges for the
visualization community.

Chandrajit Bajaj is the director of the Center for
Computational Visualization, in the Institute for
Computational and Engineering Sciences (ICES) and
a Professor of Computer Sciences at the University of
Texas at Austin. Bajaj holds the Computational Applied
Mathematics Chair in Visualization. He is also an affiliate faculty member of Mathematics, Electrical and Biomedical Engineering, Neurosciences, and a fellow of the
Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology. He is on the editorial boards for the International Journal of Computational
Geometry and Applications, the ACM Computing Surveys,
and the SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences. He is a fellow
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS), and a fellow of the Association of Computing
Machinery (ACM).

xi

