The Mental Map and Memorability in Dynamic Graphs
Daniel Archambault∗

Helen C. Purchase†

Clique Strategic Research Cluster, University College Dublin

School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow

A BSTRACT
In dynamic graph drawing, preserving the mental map, or ensuring that the location of nodes do not change significantly as the
information evolves over time is considered an important property
by algorithm designers. Many prior experiments have attempted to
verify this principle, with surprisingly little success. These experiments have used several different algorithmic methods, a variety of
graph interpretation questions on both real and fabricated data, and
different presentation methods. However, none of the results have
conclusively demonstrated the importance of mental map preservation on task performance. Our experiment measures the efficacy
of the dynamic graph drawing in a different manner: we look at
how memorable the evolving graph is, rather than how easy it is to
interpret.
As observed in the previous studies, we found no significant difference in terms of response time or error rate when preserving
the mental map. While preserving the mental map is a good idea
in principle, we find that it may not always support performance.
However, our qualitative data suggests that, in terms of the user’s
perception, preserving the mental map makes memorability tasks
easier. Our qualitative data also suggests that there may be two features of the dynamic graph drawing that may assist in their memorability: interesting subgraphs that remain visible over time and
interesting patterns in node movement. The former is supported by
preserving the mental map while the latter is not.
Index Terms:
H.1.2 [Information Systems]: User/Machine
Systems—Human Factors; G.2.2 [Discrete Mathematics]: Graph
Theory—Graph Algorithms
1

I NTRODUCTION

The dynamic graph drawing problem concerns itself with ways of
visually representing a graph as it evolves over time. Typically,
several snapshots of the graph, or timeslices, are taken and these
timeslices are placed in chronological order to depict how the graph
evolves. Preserving the mental map [9, 18] in dynamic graph
drawing is usually formalized as the principle that each node in a
dynamic graph drawing algorithm should remain in the same area of
the drawing as it evolves over time. In terms of dynamic aesthetics,
this notion is expressed through the minimal edit disruption criteria
where the “placement of existing nodes and edges should change
as little as possible when a change is made to the graph” [7].
Many algorithms in the dynamic graph drawing community have
focused on ways to preserve the mental map [6, 19, 8, 11, 15, 5, 4,
13] as, intuitively, this property should support user tasks. However, many human computer interaction experiments have been run
on the topic [20, 21, 22, 2, 27] on a variety of tasks. In general dynamic graph drawing, no experiment has demonstrated a significant
benefit for mental map preservation.
In all of the user studies to date on the mental map and dynamic
graphs, the tasks selected by the experimental designers have been
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

daniel.archambault@ucd.ie
Helen.Purchase@glasgow.ac.uk

IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium 2012
28 February - 2 March, Songdo, Korea
978-1-4673-0866-3/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

readability tasks. Readability tasks test the ability of participants
to read a graph and extract structural information in order to answer a question. Mental map preservation can influence readability
by restricting node movement. On general graphs, the readability of degrees [2, 21] and connections between sets of nodes [22]
have been tested. Questions related to the dynamic nature of the
graph series, the appearance of nodes or edges [2, 27], have also
been tested with little to no significant effect when the mental map
is preserved. However, to date, these experiments have not tested
the effect of the mental map on memory in the context of dynamic
graphs. An experiment which tests a memorability task would test
the ability for participants to remember a dynamic graph series and
reliably determine if it is the same or different. Memorability and
readability tasks are related, but it is interesting to explicitly test
the ability of users to remember the evolution of a dynamic graph
sequence to see if it has changed. It may be that mental map preservation can better support memory tasks as users could potentially
offload cognitive effort to the drawing if the nodes and edges stay
in similar areas of the plane. Therefore, memorability tasks could
be better supported by the mental map.
Memorability tasks are important for information discovery.
Support for these tasks help with mental comparisons between
graph series and with visualizing differences in multiple views of
the data. Moreover, screen space is often at a premium for dynamic
graph visualization techniques, and all the data often cannot be visible at once, requiring users to rely on visual memory.
The work presents a user study which investigates the following
research question:
• Does preserving the mental map help users remember dynamic graph sequences and therefore assist in determining if
changes have been made to them?
In our study, we found no significant difference in terms of response time or error rates on this task. This result is consistent
with the many readability studies conducted with respect to mental
map preservation on dynamic graph series. However, we found that
preserving the mental map was significantly preferred for this task,
and, qualitatively, certain features in the graph that would benefit
from mental map preservation were used by the participants in order
to perform the memorability tasks. We also found some evidence
for two types of features used for memorization: static features,
pertaining to the interconnections between nodes in the graph, and
dynamic features, relating to the motion of certain subgraphs.
2 R ELATED W ORK
Currently, no experiment has evaluated the mental map in terms of
the memorability of dynamic graph sequences. However, a number
of works have looked at the readability of dynamic graph sequences
and others have looked at visual memory or memorability tasks on
different types of data in the information visualization community.
In section 2.1, we look at the many experiments that have investigated the effectiveness of the mental map, and in section 2.2, we
present experiments that have evaluated visual memory or memorability tasks in other areas of information visualization.
2.1 Mental Map Readability Experiments
A number of experiments have tested a variety of readability tasks
on general and specific types of graphs in order to support the effec-

89

tiveness of the mental map. However, currently, there is no study
where the mental map has been shown to have a significant, positive
effect on the performance of participants reading general dynamic
graph drawings.
Purchase et al. [20] tested the preservation of the mental map
in the context of dynamic, hierarchically drawn directed acyclic
graphs. They tested the algorithm of G¨org et al. [15], and found
that maintaining the mental map was important for the comprehension of an evolving graph where nodes need to be identifiable by
name, but that it was less important for tasks that focus on edges
rather than nodes, or which do not require that nodes be nominally
differentiated from each other. No other significant effect of the
mental map was found in the study.
In Saffrey [22], participants were asked to read connections between tightly clustered groups of nodes in a dynamic graph. The algorithm used for this study was a novel algorithm that preserved the
mental map based on geometric restriction. The user study found
that preserving the user’s mental map by restricting node movement
does not always contribute positively to understanding, especially
in the case of significant node overlap. In both of the studies presented in the paper, a layout based purely on a static drawing algorithm applied to each timeslice, with no restriction on node movement, produced the least errors.
Purchase et al. [21] examined the preservation of the mental map
in the context of degree reading tasks. The experiment used the
Graphael system of Ertin et al. [11], to draw the dynamic graph
series. A high, medium, and no mental map preservation parameter was tested. The results of this experiment indicated that the
extremes, no mental map preservation followed by high, produced
the best performance, suggesting that individual preference could
have been important. A compromise between the two performed
significantly worse on this task.
Archambault et al. [2] tested mental map preservation in the context of animation and small multiples presentation methods for dynamic graphs. In their experiment, Graphael [11] was used and a
no and high mental map preservation factor was tested in the experiment. The tasks used in the study were based on degree, appearance, growth, and path reading questions. The experiment found
no significant difference of notable magnitude between no mental
map preservation and high mental map preservation for either small
multiples or animation.
Zaman et al. [27] had a mental map factor when evaluating the
DARLS system for its effectiveness to determine the difference between two hierarchically drawn, directed acyclic graphs. In the first
experiment of the paper, a low mental map preservation version
of the algorithm was tested against a high mental map preservation
version of the algorithm on tasks that involve finding the appearance
of new nodes in the graph. For this task, no significant difference
was found in terms of response time or error rates.
The main limitations of all of these experiments is that they test
primarily readability or appearance questions. Also, for general,
undirected dynamic graph drawing, the experiments generally find
that for most tasks the mental map does not help readability, but
does not significantly hurt readability either. In our experiment,
we instead test the performance of a memorability task to see if
preserving the mental map has an effect.
2.2 Visual Memory and Memorability Experiments
In the field of information visualization, a number of experiments
have looked at visual memory or memorability tasks in the context
of various types of information displays. As the work is related to
our study, we summarize it in this section.
Lam et al. [16] looked at the effect of scaling, rotation, rectangular fisheye, and polar fisheye transformations on visual memory.
The data sets used in this experiment were static graphs and with or
without the superimposition of appropriate grids. The study maps

90

out clear no-cost zones and demonstrates significant benefits when
overlaying grids in all transformations except polar fisheye.
Tory et al. [24] compared coloured dot, contour, and landscape
visualizations for non-spatial data at different levels of density in
a visual memory context. Participants were asked to memorize a
set of eight images of non-spatial data in a learning phase and then
were presented with eight images in a testing phase and asked if the
image appeared in the learning phase. The experiment found that
dots and landscapes were significantly more accurate than contour
images of the data. As the number of dots increased, dots were
significantly more accurate than landscapes.
Two experiments have looked at revisitation tasks. Revisitation
tasks require participants to remember where objects in a particular space are located and how they can be reached a second time
whereas general memorability is a measure of the degree to which
people remember things in the information space [23, 14]. Skopik
et al. [23] examined the effect of fisheye distortions on revisitation tasks in a graph with and without landmarks. The first study
required participants to revisit a node in a graph after the fisheyedistorted view had been shifted to a random location. The study
found a significant effect on task completion time with increasing
fisheye distortion. In the second study, they found that using visual landmarks significantly reduced task completion time under
the same sorts of distortions. Ghani et al. [14] studied the effects
of spatial features added to the background of the graph such as
coloured patches, colour or texture encoding on the nodes, or combinations of the techniques had on revisitation tasks in static graph
drawings. Their experiments found that coloured grids significantly
improved response times on revisitation tasks and that landmarking
is generally promising in this context.
3 T HE E XPERIMENT
To test the effect of mental map preservation on memorability, we
performed a within subject experiment. We employed a 3 condition
(No Mental Map, Medium Mental Map, High Mental Map) × 3
data set (MIT, threads2, van de Bunt) × 2 version × 2 repetition × 1 question design. Thus, each participant performed 36
tasks in the experiment.
3.1 Task
Our research question required participants to memorize a dynamic
graph sequence and report if any changes have been made to it.
Similar to many of the other studies in the information visualization community which have tested visual memory, we divided the
blocks in our experiment into two phases: a memorization phase
and a recall phase. In the memorization phase, participants were
requested to memorize three graph series each six timeslices long.
During this phase, participants were given the following instruction:
• Please memorize the following graph series.
All nodes and edges in the memorization graph were the same
colour, a light grey, and participants were instructed to play the
video as many times as desired to memorize the graph. After the
memorization phase, participants entered a recall phase, where
they were shown a series of graphs, some of which were identical
to those in the memorization phase, and some which had a small
percentage of nodes removed. During this phase, participants were
asked if the graph was exactly the same as one presented in the
memorization phase or if it had been modified. Participants were
asked the following question:
• Is this graph exactly the same as one of the graphs presented
in the memorization phase?
All nodes and edges in the recall phase were the same colour,
a light grey, and participants were instructed to play the video as

(a) Memorization Phase

(b) Recall Phase
Figure 1: Interfaces for both phases of the experiment. (a) Memorization phase. Participants play the video and click on “next sequence” when
they believe that they have memorized the graph. (b) Recall Phase. A question in the upper right corner asks if the graph was present in the
memorization block. Participants are presented with two possible answers “yes” and “no”. They select the appropriate radio button and click
“submit answer” to respond. In both cases, Threads2 is shown.

many times as desired to determine if the graph had been modified.
Each recall phase consisted of twelve questions: four graphs associated with each graph in the memorization phase. Two of these
graphs were identical to the graph presented in the memorization
phase. The remaining two graphs were modified by selecting and
removing 8% of the nodes in the graph and all their incident edges.
We determined the appropriate percentage of nodes to remove from
the graph through piloting – an amount of change that was discernible, but not too extreme. In order to ensure that participants
watched the animation, the first and the last timeslice were always
identical to the graph in the memorization phase and all changes
were induced somewhere between timeslices two through five.
3.2 Interface
In this experiment, we use animation: the most common presentation method for dynamic graphs. In both the memorization and
recall phases of the experiment, our animation widget was the same.
In the experiment, we presented the animation of the dynamic graph
series in the most common presentation method used by layout al-

gorithm designers, similar to a movie player. In this presentation,
the view of the graph takes up the entire screen and smooth transitions morph the graph from one timeslice to another. Nodes that
are added to the data or removed from it are faded in or out of the
display respectively. The positions of nodes and edges are linearly
interpolated between frames.
Full control over the animation during the phases of the experiment was allowed to ensure that participants were able to memorize or determine the differences in the graph sequence to the best
of their ability. The participants could play, pause, and rewind the
video at any time. However, the animation started to play automatically at the beginning of the task so that participants could perform
the task with little interaction, if desired. Participants could also
drag the slider at their own rate. No other form of interaction, including zooming, was allowed. This interface was used previously
in the experiments of Archambault et al. [1, 2].
Figure 1(a) shows the interface in the memorization phase. In
this phase, the instructions in the upper right asked participants to
try and memorize the graph shown in the widget. When participants

91

timeslice 1

timeslice 3

timeslice 5

Without Mental Map Preservation

Medium Mental Map Preservation

High Mental Map Preservation
Figure 2: The three levels of mental map preservation used in this experiment on the van de Bunt data set. The “Without mental map
preservation” level does not attempt to preserve the mental map at all. The medium level has inter-timeslice edges set to 60, and the high level
has inter-timeslice edges set to 400 with nodes pinned to their average positions.

92

felt that they had memorized the graph, they clicked on “next sequence” to proceed to the next graph sequence to be memorized or
the recall block. In Figure 1(b), the recall phase interface is shown.
Participants played the video, decided if this graph had been present
in the memorization block, and answered either “yes” or “no” using
the radio buttons on the interface. In order to proceed to the next
question, participants clicked on “confirm answer”.
3.3 Data Sets
Three data sets were tested in this experiment: MIT, Threads2,
and van de Bunt. All data sets were six timeslices long and
drawn from real data sets to be of realistic size and structure. Graph
size and length of the time series was informed through piloting and
other experiments performed on dynamic graph drawing readability [21, 1, 2]. These data sets are described below.
MIT is six timeslices of the MIT Reality Mining project data
set [10]. The data set consists the mobile telephone calls of a hundred students at MIT over the course of the 2004-2005 academic
year. Nodes are mobile telephones and edges exist if a call was
made between those two mobiles. The data set was divided into
seven equal timeslices each consisting of about forty days of mobile telephone activity. Eight non-interacting two node components
were removed from the data set. We selected the first six timeslices
of this data for the experiment.
Threads2, used in the work of Frishman and Tal [13], is a
graph series representing online newsgroup discussions. Nodes are
authors of newsgroup articles, and an edge exists between two authors if one replied to the posting of another. We selected the last
six timeslices of this data.
The van de Bunt data set [26] is a network that was used
previously in dynamic graph readability experiments [1, 12]. The
nodes in the graph are undergraduate students. An edge exists between two undergraduates if they self-reported in a survey that they
had a relationship. In the original graph, there were a number
of edge types which encoded if the relationship was best friends,
friends, friendly neutral, or troubled. In our experiment, we used
only the links that were best friends or friends and the last six timeslices of the data.
3.4 The Mental Map
Graphael [11] is a dynamic graph drawing algorithm where the degree of mental map preservation can be adjusted relatively easily.
In the algorithm, inter-timeslice edges exist between nodes which
represent the same node across timeslices. This graph, containing
all real edges and inter-timeslice edges, is drawn once with a forcedirected algorithm. If these inter-timeslice edges are stiff, nodes
stay in the same area of the plane, while if they are loose, nodes
move more freely.
In this experiment, we used three levels of mental map preservation: no preservation, medium preservation, and high preservation. For the series of layouts that did not preserve the mental map,
each frame is drawn independently with the force-directed algorithm used by Graphael. The medium preservation condition set
inter-timeslice edges to a value of sixty. These relatively stiff intertimeslice edges attempted to keep the same node in approximately
the same area of the drawing in all the timeslices in which it was
present. Thus, the heuristic would drive the layout to move as few
nodes as possible as little as possible and attempt to preserve graph
shape. For a high level of mental map preservation, we set the value
of the inter-timeslice edges to 400 and took the average position
of each node throughout all time, pinning them to a final position.
When nodes were pinned they did not move at all through the entire animation sequence. An example depicting the evolution of
van de Bunt under all three mental map conditions is shown in
Figure 2. The approach for selecting inter-timeslice edge strength

was based on visual inspection, piloting, and consistency with the
values used in previous readability experiments [21, 2].
3.5 Experimental Design
Participants began the experiment with a session that demonstrated
the experimental interface. During this session, the participants
could ask questions, find out about the experimental tasks, and learn
how to find the answers to the questions.
The experimental procedure required all participants to perform
all tasks in the experiment. Thus, there were thirty-six experimental
tasks in all: 3 mental map preservation conditions, 3 data sets, and
4 versions (2 unaltered, 2 modified). These thirty-six tasks were
divided into three blocks of twelve questions each. Each of these
memorization blocks had three graphs for which each data set and
mental map preservation condition was asked exactly once. Memorization blocks for the participants were selected via all twelve solutions to the Latin squares problem and randomized for each participant. The recall phase consisted of the two variant graphs and
the unaltered graph (asked twice) for each of the three data sets,
giving a total of twelve questions. These questions were also independently randomized for each participant. Thus, after all three
blocks were answered all three graphs under all three conditions
were asked to each participant. These blocks were prefixed with
a practice block of three memorization graphs and twelve recall
graphs to help overcome any learning effects. Participants were not
aware that this initial block of twelve questions did not form part of
the experimental data collection.
The animations were rendered in real time using the Tulip framework [3]. No time limit was enforced per question or for the experiment overall. However, a warning label appeared on the screen after
forty seconds had elapsed for each question, and participants were
encouraged to finish their work quickly after that point. The animation started playing automatically after a delay of three seconds and
took about ten seconds to play in its entirety.
Each experiment was conducted individually with the researcher and took approximately thirty minutes, including the preexperiment training, practice tasks, experimental tasks for both experimental conditions, and post-experiment questionnaire. Overall,
the data from twenty-five participants was used. Participants were
drawn from members of the Complex and Adaptive Systems Laboratory of University College Dublin (UCD CASL).
4

R ESULTS

We present our overall results comparing the effects of no, medium,
and high mental map preservation on memorability in this section: both overall and divided by data set. A Shapiro-Wilk test
(α = 0.05), was used to determine whether or not the data was normally distributed. For the normally distributed error data, a repeated
measures ANOVA was used to determine significance. For the nonnormally distributed response time and preference data, we used a
Friedman non-parametric analysis. Significant differences between
pairs of conditions were determined with adjusted pairwise comparison tests.
In all cases, a standard significance level of α = 0.05 was used.
After analyzing the data for the effect of mental map preservation,
we analyzed the separate data sets for each of the three graphs:
MIT, Threads2, and van de Bunt. In this case, we applied a
Bonferroni correction, thus reducing the required significance level
to α = 0.025.
4.1 The Mental Map Condition
Figure 3 compares the three mental map preservation conditions
with respect to both error rate and response time. We found that
response time was not normally distributed while error rate was.
No significant difference in terms of response time (p = 0.19) or
error rate (p = 0.27) was found.

93

Response time (in seconds)

Error Rate (% error)
Figure 4: Response time and error rate divided by data set. No significant difference was found in either response time or error rate for any of
the data sets individually.

• nodes move short distances
• nodes do not move at all
For this question, the data was not normally distributed and we
found that no movement was significantly preferred to large movement (p = 0.011) and small movement (p = 0.021).
In our second question, we asked:
(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Response time and error rate for high, medium, and no
mental map preservation over all data sets. We found no significant
difference in terms of response time (p = 0.19) or error rate (p = 0.27)
in this data.

4.2 Mental Map Divided by Data Set
We subsequently divided the data by data set. Figure 4 shows the
results of this analysis. No significant difference was found when
any of the data sets were considered in isolation.
4.3 Preference Data
In terms of the quantitative preference data, we found significant results for both ranking questions of our survey. For these questions,
numbers were a ranking score provided by the participants with 1
corresponding to most preferred or useful and 3 corresponding to
least preferred or useful. Figures 5 and 6 show the results of this
analysis. In question 1, we asked:
1. In some of the dynamic graphs, nodes moved large distances
across the screen. In some, nodes moved short distances. In
others, nodes did not move at all. Please rank these three
methods according to how easy they made it to remember the
graphs (1 is easiest and 3 is most difficult):
• nodes move large distances

94

2. Please rank how important the following features were to
identifying the graphs (1 is most important and 3 is the least):
• large node movement
• constant node position
• certain groups of nodes that were unique/constant
This data was not normally distributed. We found that certain groups of nodes (p = 0.003) and constant position (p =
0.011) were considered significantly more important than large
node movement.
5 D ISCUSSION
We found no significant difference in terms of response time or error rate overall or on any of the data sets individually. This result is
consistent with a number of experiments that have looked at mental
map preservation in terms of graph readability [20, 21, 22, 2, 27],
even though our experiment looks at the different task of memorability. Our results, when taken in context with the other five studies
on the topic, imply that preserving the mental map by keeping the
same node in the same area of the plane does not seem to have a
quantitative significant effect on task performance. This result is
surprising given the importance of preserving the mental map in
the dynamic graph drawing community.
In the survey data, participants found it easier to memorize diagrams drawn with a high degree of mental map preservation when
compared to medium or no mental map preservation. Thus, even
though quantitatively the mental map condition did not make a difference, subjectively participants felt that it did. Thus, it may be

Ease of Method Memorability
Large Distances
Short Distances
No Movement
2.27
2.23
1.46
2.5
2.0
1.0
0.83
0.71
0.71
Importance of Feature
Node Movement Const Node Position
Subgraphs
2.54
1.73
1.62
3.0
2.0
2.0
0.76
0.78
0.64

Mean
Median
Std. Deviation

Mean
Median
Std. Deviation

Figure 6: Table of preference data. The top part of the table compares the three mental map preservation conditions while the bottom part
compares the importance of certain layout features. We found that no movement in node position was significantly preferred to large movement
and small movement. We also found that subgraphs and constant position were significantly more important than large node movement.

– look and feel of the design and movement rather than
the small details
– specific key movements of certain parts of the graph
– order of changes, inversions of subgraphs
– used unique movement of graph to remember the sequence
(a)

(b)

– how the graph expands or shrinks on the computer
screen

Figure 5: Results of our ranked survey data. Lines between bars
indicate where significance was found. (a) Question 1: We found that
no node movement was significantly easier than short movement and
large movement. (b) Question 2: We found certain groups of nodes
(subgraphs) and constant node position significantly more important
than large node movement.

important for user confidence and perceived ease of memorization
that the mental map is preserved as much as possible. Secondly,
participants considered identifying certain groups of nodes significantly more important for memorizing the graph sequences than
large or small node movement. As preserving the relative position
of certain groups of nodes benefit from mental map preservation,
qualitatively the mental map seems important in this case.
From our observations, and from the survey responses of the participants, we suggest that there is evidence of two features at work
that are important in terms of the memorability of the graph:
• Static Features: static patterns in the interconnections between nodes in certain subgraphs
• Motion Features: patterns of movement in the graph.
The no mental map condition of Threads2, in particular, had
a characteristic motion and participants noticed when it brought
in newly appearing nodes from the periphery. Below, we provide
some examples from our qualitative feedback regarding the features
participants used to memorize the graph:
• Static Features:
– shapes such as a kite, star, or ring
– forms that I can recognize: house or star
– interesting subgraphs such as cliques
– relate graph shapes to geometric shapes and real world
components
• Motion Features:

• Combination
– if I could relate part or all of the graph to a real world
object and describe the changing graph in these terms.
A crab with three legs grows a tail; this tail fattens and
moves left and then a 3-star grows on the tail
As it seems that these two features aid in the memorability of dynamic graphs for animation, perhaps the mental map is more useful
for other presentation methods, such as small multiples. In a small
multiples [25] interface, all timeslices are presented on the screen
at once with each timeslice placed inside its own window. The user
scans the matrix of windows to see how the graph evolves. As there
are no transitions between frames, there is no motion and the preservation of the mental map may be more important in this context. As
small multiples has been shown to be more effective than animation
on a number of tasks [2, 12], confirming this conjecture would be
interesting.
To date, a number of experiments have not witnessed a quantitative benefit, either in terms of response time or error rate, when
preserving the mental map on dynamic graph drawings. Thus,
the principle in general may not be as important as originally assumed. However, we should continue to try and identify a task
that may benefit from the mental map. Tasks, such as revisitation
tasks [23, 14], would be a promising direction for this research.
6

C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we present a human computer interaction experiment
to test the mental map in the context of dynamic graph memorability. As observed in the previous studies, we found no significant
difference in terms of response time or error rate when preserving
the mental map. It is becoming increasingly clear that preservation
of the mental map, while a good idea in principle, and while valued
by the graph drawing community, may not always support performance. However, our qualitative data suggests that preserving the
mental map appears to make memorability tasks easier in terms of
the user’s perception. While including an algorithmic feature that
attempts to minimize the movement of nodes may not actually improve performance, it could improve perception of its usefulness.

95

Further studies are required to fully understand how this definition
of mental map preservation and others support user tasks.
We have tried to collect data that allows us to make generalizations about the mental map and memorability by including more
than one data set and three preservation levels. It would have been
infeasible to test a much wider range of data sets and preservation
levels. The generalization of these results are therefore limited by
these parameters. It was necessary for our participants to have some
knowledge of graphs, meaning that our results only hold for this
particular population. Running the experiment in a laboratory situation, on context-free graphs (even if based on real data sets) means
that these results may not extrapolate to the visualization of graphs
within an application context.
It is important to note that we are using a definition of the mental map whereby the same node should stay in the same area of
the plane. Other definitions of the mental map exist [17], which
preserve qualities of a dynamic graph through its evolution such as
orthogonal ordering of components, average relative distance, edge
orientation, and nearest neighbours. It would be interesting to test
these definitions in readability and memorability task contexts.
Finally, in certain areas of the data mining literature, there has
been some criticism of timeslicing as a technique for dealing with
dynamic graphs in general. An interesting idea would be to look
at more event-based techniques for dynamic graph drawing and visualization. In an event driven approach, time is not divided into
equal length intervals containing all edges present during that interval. Instead, these techniques visualize the appearance of each node
and each edge as its own proper event, achieving a higher resolution
in time. Further work is required to develop systems that visualize
dynamic graphs in this way and further evaluation is required to
determine if these visualizations are effective.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first author would like to acknowledge the support of the Clique
Strategic Research Cluster funded by Science Foundation Ireland
(SFI) Grant No. 08/SRC/I140. We would also like to thank John
Hamer for writing the dynamic graph layout algorithm based on the
Graphael model. Finally, we would like to thank all of the participants who took part in this experiment.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Archambault, H. C. Purchase, and B. Pinaud. Difference map readability for dynamic graphs. In Proc. of Graph Drawing (GD 2010),
volume 6502 of LNCS, pages 50–61, 2010.
[2] D. Archambault, H. C. Purchase, and B. Pinaud. Animation, small
multiples, and the effect of mental map preservation in dynamic
graphs. IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
17(4):539–552, 2011.
[3] D. Auber. Tulip : A huge graph visualization framework. In P. Mutzel
and M. J¨unger, editors, Graph Drawing Software, Mathematics and
Visualization, pages 105–126. Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[4] K. Boitmanis, U. Brandes, and C. Pich. Visualizing internet evolution
on the autonomous systems level. In Proc. of Graph Drawing (GD
’07), volume 4875 of LNCS, pages 365–376, 2007.
[5] U. Brandes, D. Fleischer, and T. Puppe. Dynamic spectral layout of
small worlds. In Proc. of Graph Drawing (GD ’05), number 3843 in
LNCS, pages 25–36, 2005.
[6] R. F. Cohen, G. D. Battista, I. G. Tollis, R. F. Cohen, R. Tamassia, and
I. G. Tollis. A framework for dynamic graph drawing. ACM Symp. on
Computational Geometry, pages 261–270, 1992.
[7] M. K. Coleman and D. S. Parker. Aesthetics-based graph layout for human consumption. Software - Practice and Experience,
26(12):1415–1438, 1996.
[8] S. Diehl and C. G¨org. Graphs, they are a changing – dynamic graph
drawing for a sequence of graphs. In Proc. of Graph Drawing (GD
’02), volume 2528 of LNCS, pages 23–31, 2002.
[9] P. Eades, W. Lai, K. Misue, and K. Sugiyama. Preserving the mental
map of a diagram. In Proc. of Compugraphics, pages 24–33, 1991.

96

[10] N. Eagle, A. Pentland, and D. Lazer. Inferring social network structure
using mobile phone data. Proc. of the National Academy of Sciences,
106(36):15274–15278, 2009.
[11] C. Erten, P. J. Harding, S. Kobourov, K. Wampler, and G. V. Yee.
GraphAEL: Graph animations with evolving layouts. In Proc. of
Graph Drawing (GD ’03), volume 2912 of LNCS, pages 98–110,
2003.
[12] M. Farrugia and A. Quigley. Effective temporal graph layout: A comparative study of animation versus static display methods. Journal of
Information Visualization, 10(1):47–64, 2011.
[13] Y. Frishman and A. Tal. Online dynamic graph drawing. IEEE Trans.
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(4):727–740, 2008.
[14] S. Ghani and N. Elmqvist. Improving revisitation in graphs through
static spatial features. In Proc. of Graphics Interface (GI 2011), pages
175–182, 2011.
[15] C. G¨org, P. Birke, M. Pohl, and S. Diehl. Dynamic graph drawing of
sequences of orthogonal and hierarchical graphs. In Proc. of Graph
Drawing (GD ’ 04), volume 3383 of LNCS, pages 228–238, 2004.
[16] H. Lam, R. A. Rensink, and T. Munzner. Effects of 2-d geometric
transformations on visual memory. In Proc. 3rd Symp. Applied Perception in Graphics and Visualization (APVG 06), pages 119–126,
2006.
[17] Y. Lee, C. Lin, and H. Yen. Mental map preserving graph drawing
using simulated annealing. In Proc. of the Asia-Pacific Symp. on Information Visualisation, pages 179–188, 2006.
[18] K. Misue, P. Eades, W. Lai, and K. Sugiyama. Layout adjustment
and the mental map. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing,
6:183–210, 1995.
[19] S. North. Incremental layout in dynaDAG. In Proc. of Graph Drawing
(GD ’95), volume 1027 of LNCS, pages 409–418, 1995.
[20] H. C. Purchase, E. Hoggan, and C. G¨org. How important is the “mental map”? – an empirical investigation of a dynamic graph layout algorithm. In Proc. Graph Drawing (GD ’06), volume 4372 of LNCS,
pages 184–195, 2006.
[21] H. C. Purchase and A. Samra. Extremes are better: Investigating mental map preservation in dynamic graphs. In Diagrams 2008, volume
5223 of LNAI, pages 60–73, 2008.
[22] P. Saffrey and H. C. Purchase. The “mental map” versus “static aesthetic” compromise in dynamic graphs: A user study. In Proc. of the
9th Australasian User Interface Conference, pages 85–93, 2008.
[23] A. Skopik and C. Gutwin. Improving revisitation in fisheye views
with visit wear. In Proc. of SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 2005), pages 771–780, 2005.
[24] M. Tory, C. Swindells, and R. Dreezer. Comparing dot and landscape
spatializations for visual memory differences. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics (Proc. InfoVis 2009), 16(6):1033–1040,
2009.
[25] E. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[26] M. van Duijn, E. Zeggelink, M. Huisman, F. Stokman, and
F. Wasseur.
Evolution of sociology freshmen into a frendship network. The Journal of Math. Sociology, 27(2):153–191,
2003. http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/˜snijders/siena/
vdBunt_data.htm.
[27] L. Zaman, A. Kalra, and W. Stuerzlinger. The effect of animation, dual
view, difference layers, and relative re-layout in hierarchical diagram
differencing. In Proc. of Graphics Interface (GI 2011), pages 183–
190, 2011.

